Whanganui
District Council
Long-Term Plan
2021-2031

Volume 1

Volume

1

Overview including
community outcomes and
detailed financial information

Volume

2

Detailed Council activities
– activity plans and
performance framework

Volume

3

Infrastructure Strategy.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

|3|

PO Box 637
101 Guyton Street
Whanganui
Telephone: (06) 349 0001
Email: yourcouncil@whanganui.govt.nz
www.whanganui.govt.nz
This plan (comprising three separate volumes as listed on the cover) was formally adopted by the
Whanganui District Council on 22 June 2021 as its Long-Term Plan for the 10-year period
commencing on 1 July 2021.
|4|

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Contents
Introduction
Message from the Mayor and Chief Executive

Page 6-7

Auditor’s report

Page 8

Executive summary

Page 11

Prospective cost of service statement

Page 28

Rates required by activity for 2021/22

Page 29

Consultation

Page 31

Our district – past, present and future

Page 34

Whanganui: Leading Edge

Page 38

Council controlled organisations

Page 44

Building community with tangata whenua

Page 47

Prospective financial information
Assumptions

Page 52

Funding impact statement

Page 65

Prospective statement of comprehensive revenue and expense

Page 84

Prospective statement of financial position

Page 85

Prospective cash flow statement

Page 86

Prospective statement of changes in net assets/equity

Page 87

Prospective statement of reserve funds

Page 88

Notes to the financial statements

Page 89

Long-term plan disclosure statement

Page 90

Policies
Revenue and financing policy

Page 94

Financial strategy

Page 107

Significance and engagement policy

Page 116

Water and sanitary assessment and waste management and minimisation plan

Page 117

Property portfolio investment plan

Page 117

Statement of accounting policies

Page 118

Contact us

Page 128

Glossary

Page 129
WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

|5|

Message from the Mayor
Ngā mihi nui ki a koutou.
Welcome to Whanganui District Council’s
long-term plan for 2021-2031.
This plan represents the collective priorities
of your elected members – myself and twelve
councillors – in anticipation of the next 10 years.
Creating a long-term plan requires us to call on
evidence, logic and vision as we look ahead.
As we all know, the future is never certain.
Curveballs can come from any direction.
However, it is necessary to try to envisage
the future needs of our community and to
allocate resources wisely. We receive advice
and recommendations from council officers and
pay attention to what our community is saying,
so we can arrive at well-reasoned and robust
decisions for our district.
The COVID-19 emergency of 2020 had an impact
on some businesses and employment across
the country but in Whanganui, we have actually
seen a spectacular recovery over the past year.
Whanganui is booming, building a reputation as
a destination for home buyers and visitors alike.
Our population is growing rapidly.
This current growth itself brings new challenges
and even as our economy grows, those most
vulnerable in our community are experiencing
stress as a result of the pressure on housing.
This council recognises that it needs to play a
role in creating an environment that increases
the availability of safe affordable homes in our
community.
Meanwhile, as the ink dries on this document,
the threat of COVID continues to be very evident
globally as the virus and its variants rage far away,
|6|

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

reminding us that we cannot be complacent. Thus,
this is a relatively conservative plan.
Rates rises will be kept low across the 10 years.
Year one sees the largest increase, which will see
rates set at an average of 5.7%, compensating
in part for a rates relief package introduced in
2020 in response to COVID-19. This is still one of
the lowest rates rises in the country at this time.
On average we are looking at increases of 3.1%
over the course of the 10 years in this plan.
The decades-long question of the roofing of the
Whanganui Velodrome has finally been decided
by this council after a motion to roof the facility
at a cost of $20 million was defeated.
This was always going to be a controversial
decision; some will be disappointed. I recognise
the efforts of all those - the Regional Velodrome
Development Trust, the cycling community
and others, who have held this aspiration for
the velodrome over many years, however our
community looks to the council to prioritise
carefully and ensure the greatest benefit for all.
Our priorities for this long-term plan included
keeping rates as low as possible, extending
the Davis Library and investing in town centre
regeneration, youth spaces and places, our
housing strategy and a coastal plan for the district.
On behalf of the council I would like to thank
everyone who submitted to this plan. We received
a record 608 submissions and appreciated the
knowledge, insights and perspectives that were
shared with us. We read them all and we have
paid attention to what was said.
Nāku iti noa, nā

Hamish McDouall
Mayor

Message from the Chief Executive
Tēnā koutou katoa
Developing and consulting on a long-term plan
is a statutory requirement for all councils. These
are 10-year plans and they must be delivered
every three years. This ensures the council is
able to respond to opportunities and changing
contexts.
This long-term plan provides a road map for our
operations over the next decade. Priorities have
been confirmed, budgets have been allocated
and time frames established.
The work to get to this point began over a year
ago with council officers gathering information,
holding workshops with councillors and
undertaking a programme of pre-engagement
with our community.
A consultation document was developed – this
is a legislative requirement – and independently
audited. The resulting unqualified audit we
received is testament to the quality of this
team’s work.
An extensive communications and engagement
programme was launched for the consultation
and a large number of submissions were
received and processed.
Our role now is to implement the plan effectively,
creating or building on the work programmes
associated with each item of expenditure. Further
consultation is likely to be required as we get
into the detail of delivery and some activities will
be contingent upon external funding.
In year one of this plan we will complete a
needs assessment of youth places and spaces
provision in our district. In year two we will
look to implement recommendations from this

assessment. Options such as a youth hub will
be scoped and considered, with the focus on
advocacy and wellbeing.
A $2.8 million extension to the Davis Library will
be constructed in year four (2024/25). $920,000
of grant funding is anticipated for this project,
leaving the council to fund up to $1.9 million.
This development will significantly enhance our
library services and further add to the cultural
touchstone that is Pukenamu Queen’s Park, given
the outstanding Sarjeant Gallery redevelopment
will have been completed by this time.
Development and implementation of a coastal
plan will begin as an ongoing activity from
year one of this plan. This important work will
provide for longer term and more sustainable
solutions to the challenges in our dynamic
coastal environment, ensuring our community
can continue to experience and enjoy it in years
to come.
Given our ongoing work programme also
includes town centre regeneration, revitalisation
of Whanganui’s port and the Sarjeant Gallery
redevelopment we will continue to be a busy and
progressive council.
While roofing the Whanganui Velodrome has
not been supported in this long-term plan,
$2.5 million has been allocated for the existing
facility. Conversations with Whanganui’s cycling
community will inform our decisions on the best
use of this resourcing.

Kym Fell
Chief Executive

Overall, we have completed or are well underway
with most of our key projects and this puts
us in a fortunate position compared with
many councils. Community relationships and
partnerships will remain a priority for Whanganui
District Council as we move forward.
WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

|7|

To the reader:
Independent Auditor’s report on Whanganui District Council’s 2021-31 long-term plan
I am the Auditor-General’s appointed auditor for Whanganui District Council
(the Council). The Local Government Act 2002 (the Act) requires the Council’s
long-term plan (plan) to include the information in Part 1 of Schedule 10 of
the Act. Section 94 of the Act requires an audit report on the Council’s plan.
Section 259C of the Act requires a report on disclosures made under certain
regulations. I have carried out this work using the staff and resources of Audit
New Zealand. We completed our report on 22 June 2021.
Opinion
In our opinion:
• the plan provides a reasonable basis for:
»
long-term, integrated decision-making and co-ordination of the
Council’s resources; and
»
accountability of the Council to the community;
•

the information and assumptions underlying the forecast information in the
plan are reasonable; and

•

the disclosures on pages 90 to 93 of Volume 1 represent a complete list
of the disclosures required by Part 2 of the Local Government (Financial
Reporting and Prudence) Regulations 2014 (the Regulations) and accurately
reflect the information drawn from the plan.

Basis of opinion
We carried out our work in accordance with the International Standard
on Assurance Engagements (New Zealand) 3000 (Revised) Assurance
Engagements Other Than Audits or Reviews of Historical Financial Information.
In meeting the requirements of this standard, we took into account particular
elements of the Auditor-General’s Auditing Standards and the International
Standard on Assurance Engagements 3400 The Examination of Prospective
Financial Information that were consistent with those requirements.
We assessed the evidence the Council has to support the information and
disclosures in the plan and the application of its policies and strategies to the
forecast information in the plan. To select appropriate procedures, we assessed
the risk of material misstatement and the Council’s systems and processes
applying to the preparation of the plan.
Our procedures included assessing whether:
• the Council’s financial strategy, and the associated financial policies,
support prudent financial management by the Council;
•

the Council’s infrastructure strategy identifies the significant infrastructure
issues that the Council is likely to face during the next 30 years;

•

the Council’s forecasts to replace existing assets are consistent with its
approach to replace its assets, and reasonably take into account the
Council’s knowledge of the assets’ condition and performance;

•

the information in the plan is based on materially complete and reliable
information;

•

the Council’s key plans and policies are reflected consistently and
appropriately in the development of the forecast information;

•

the assumptions set out in the plan are based on the best information
currently available to the Council and provide a reasonable and supportable
basis for the preparation of the forecast information;

This opinion does not provide assurance that the forecasts in the plan will be
achieved, because events do not always occur as expected and variations may
be material. Nor does it guarantee the accuracy of the information in the plan.
Emphasis of Matter – Uncertainty over three waters reform
Without modifying our opinion, we draw attention to the disclosures on page 14
of Volume 1, outlining the Government’s intention to make three waters reform
decisions during 2021. The effect that the reforms may have on the three
waters services provided is currently uncertain because no decisions have been
made. The plan was prepared as if these services will continue to be provided
by the Council, but future decisions may result in significant changes, which
would affect the information on which the plan has been based.
|8|

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Independence and quality control
We have complied with the Auditor-General’s:
• independence and other ethical requirements, which incorporate the
independence and ethical requirements of Professional and Ethical
Standard 1 issued by the New Zealand Auditing and Assurance Standards
Board; and

•

the forecast financial information has been properly prepared on the basis
of the underlying information and the assumptions adopted, and complies
with generally accepted accounting practice in New Zealand;

•

the rationale for the Council’s activities is clearly presented and agreed
levels of service are reflected throughout the plan;

•

the levels of service and performance measures are reasonable estimates
and reflect the main aspects of the Council’s intended service delivery and
performance; and

•

•

the relationship between the levels of service, performance measures, and
forecast financial information has been adequately explained in the plan.

Other than our work in carrying out all legally required external audits, we have
no relationship with or interests in the Council.

quality control requirements, which incorporate the quality control
requirements of Professional and Ethical Standard 3 (Amended) issued by
the New Zealand Auditing and Assurance Standards Board.

We did not evaluate the security and controls over the electronic publication of
the plan.
Responsibilities of the Council and auditor
The Council is responsible for:
• meeting all legal requirements affecting its procedures, decisions,
consultation, disclosures, and other actions relating to the preparation of
the plan;
•

presenting forecast financial information in accordance with generally
accepted accounting practice in New Zealand; and

•

having systems and processes in place to enable the preparation of a plan
that is free from material misstatement.

Debbie Perera, Audit New Zealand
On behalf of the Auditor-General, Palmerston North, New Zealand

We are responsible for expressing an independent opinion on the plan and the
disclosures required by the Regulations, as required by sections 94 and 259C
of the Act. We do not express an opinion on the merits of the plan’s policy
content.
Debbie Perera signature.docx

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

|9|

| 10 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Executive Summary

Executive
Summary
Introduction

What is the Long-Term Plan?

What’s in the Plan?

The Local Government Act requires Council to
review its activities and services every three
years and set out what it plans to do, how it
will be done, and how it will be paid for, for the
coming decade. This information is all drawn
together into one document, the Long-Term Plan
2021- 2031 (Long-Term Plan). The last Long-Term
Plan was adopted in 2018. In-between the LongTerm Plans, Council reviews the work programme
and considers any changes necessary, and
publishes an Annual Plan. The Annual Plan
highlights any changes or variances from the
Long-Term Plan for the coming year.

This Long-Term Plan:

The Long-Term Plan consists of three volumes.

Council reports on its progress against its plans
in the Annual Report. This lets the community
know whether the Council did what it said it
would and shows Council’s financial performance
against its budget.
Before any of these plans are adopted Council
consults with the community. The consultation
undertaken for this Long-Term Plan is outlined
on page 31.

• Describes the Council’s Leading Edge vision
for Whanganui
• Outlines the role Council will play in working
towards achieving that vision
• Identifies some of the key challenges facing
the Council over the next 10 years
• Provides an overview of each activity the
Council will carry out and the services it
will provide for the next 10 years, and how
Council’s performance will be measured
• Determines how much the work Council does
will cost, and how it will be funded.

Volume

1

contains an overview of the current situation and
presents the major issues facing Whanganui over
the next 10 years. It includes a funding impact
statement which shows how the rates will be set
for 2021/22 to 2030/31 and includes the financial
strategy and our financial statements.

Volume

2

presents all the detailed information for each
of Council’s groups of activities. This volume
includes key issues, assumptions and risks for
each activity, along with Community Outcomes,
levels of service and performance measures.
It also contains operational and capital
expenditure and funding implications.

Volume

3

presents our 30 year Infrastructure Strategy.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 11 |

Executive Summary

Leading edge strategy
The Leading Edge Strategy acts as Council’s
overarching strategic document. It’s an umbrella
document which sets the vision for the district
and outlines high level aspirational objectives
supported by a series of actions. It feeds directly
into the Long-Term Plan and is intended to focus
Council on its key strategic commitments.
The Leading Edge Strategy can be found on
the Council website under ‘Publications’. Key
elements of the strategy are detailed on page 38.

Financial strategy
Our Financial Strategy describes how we plan to
finance our services and activities in a way that
is sustainable over the long term. Its purpose is
to ensure Council manages financial decisions
carefully when it chooses which services to
provide. Our expenditure and funding plans
must be sustainable so that we have the capacity
and resources to deliver affordable services to
residents and ratepayers in the medium to
long term.
More information on the key points of the
Financial Strategy can be found on page 19
of the Executive Summary. The full Financial
Strategy is on page 107 of this volume.

| 12 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

30-Year infrastructure
strategy
Infrastructure provides a foundation for
building strong and resilient communities. Our
Infrastructure Strategy describes our existing
infrastructure, identifies significant issues that
might impact on this and outlines the Council’s
approach to managing infrastructure assets over
the next 30 years.
Our infrastructure portfolio comprises of
assets estimated at over $1.8 billion. Although
this infrastructure supports the safety, health,
convenience, connectivity and enjoyment of
residents and visitors, it also means that the
Council needs to be aware of, and respond to,
issues such as growth demands, the impact of
climate change, ongoing asset maintenance and
renewal, increasing legislative requirements and
changing levels of service expectations from the
community. These issues all have an impact on
rates and service delivery – with affordability an
ongoing concern for a district of Whanganui’s
size and socio-economic make-up.
The full 30-Year Infrastructure Strategy is in
Volume 3 of the Long-Term Plan 2021- 2031.

Executive Summary

What’s on
our mind
In the past three years since our last long- term
plan many things have changed. In developing
this plan and our Financial and Infrastructure
Strategies, these are our key challenges and
items of most significance.

Growth
Whanganui’s population decline has been
stemmed and the population has begun to grow
consistently for the first time since 1996 and we
now have a housing shortage to contend with.
Infometrics mid-range projections suggest our
population will grow by 330 people per annum
for the first ten years of the plan, reducing to
220 per year from years 11 to 30. We need to
invest in infrastructure to support new housing
growth areas, and we will also encourage infill
growth in existing areas whilst looking at other
ways we can support housing availability.

Significant capital projects
We have some significant capital projects
underway. We have provided substantial
investment in the port redevelopment in order
to leverage government funding and maximise
the economic opportunities the project presents
for the community. Construction of the Sarjeant
Gallery redevelopment is well underway with
significant assistance from external funding
sources, and a new animal pound has been built.
In this plan further significant capital projects
are proposed, including extending the Davis
Library, creating a youth hub, creating and
implementing a coastal plan and replacing the
Dublin Street Bridge. Many of these projects rely
on a substantial amount of external funding.

Looking after our assets

Climate change

Whanganui has spent much of the last 30 years
focusing on significant improvements to its
wastewater, stormwater and water networks. We
now generally have good quality networks in
place with average asset condition ranging from
fair to very good.

Climate change remains a critical issue for
the Whanganui community moving into the
future. In 2020 Whanganui District Council
declared a climate emergency, and has worked
collaboratively with key stakeholders and iwi
partners to develop a climate change strategy
for the district. The draft climate change
strategy, Te Rautaki Huringa Āhuarangi plots a
course for action to both mitigate and adapt to
climate change and to provide a framework for
collaboration. We are facing increased costs in a
number of activities like stormwater, roading and
parks due to the impacts of climate change.

Our new wastewater treatment plant is now
fully operational. We are continuing to invest in
improving our stormwater network to address
capacity issues and assist with climate change,
as consulted upon in our last Long-Term Plan
2018-2028. In the first three years of this plan,
we are investing an additional $500k per annum
to replace spiral welded and riveted water pipes
due to their age, low condition rating and risk.
Our roading assets are under pressure with
demands increasing beyond what the assets
were designed for. We have budgeted an
increase in funding for pavement maintenance
and bridge maintenance to address assets in
need of repair. Consideration of the replacement
of the Dublin Street bridge is a critical project
over the next ten years.
We have a significant and ever increasing
asset base to operate and maintain. Increasing
standards, legislative requirements and
community expectations are putting pressure
on us to maintain these assets and deliver our
services to increasing standards.
Over the past few years we have undertaken
extensive modelling of our infrastructure
networks to improve data information on the
condition of our assets. This has identified
some additional investment needs, particularly
around our parks. For more information on
our asset condition and performance, see our
Infrastructure Strategy.

The economy and COVID-19
COVID-19 has affected the international economy
and has resulted in substantial uncertainty and
risks to some of our investment returns, but
also has provided us with lower interest rates in
the short term. We are mindful of the fact that
COVID-19 has put financial pressure on some
of our ratepayers and we need to keep rates
affordability front of mind.

Business as usual cost
increases
We are facing increased costs just to deliver
our standard suite of services due to inflation
and price escalation. Costs like insurance have
increased significantly. We are also getting less
subsidy from NZTA from year 2 of this plan, with
our subsidy rate dropping from 61% to 60%.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 13 |

Executive Summary

Expanding our operations

Debt

During the course of this plan we have some
changes to our services that affect our operating
costs, like the opening of the redeveloped
Sarjeant Gallery in 2023 (year 3).

Our debt is higher than we predicted in our
Long-Term Plan 2018-2028. While we were
anticipating peak debt in 2019/20, our debt has
increased beyond this time and is now forecast
to continue to increase until 2023/24. This is
primarily due to additional investment in the
port redevelopment, reducing our rates increase
last year due to COVID-19, additional population
growth requiring infrastructure investment, and
increased capital investment in parks, water and
roading. While we still have substantial capacity
to borrow within our debt limits, we must
consider the implications on current ratepayers
and future generations.

We are also doing work in a number of areas
like climate change, addressing our housing
shortage, investment in our youth and
investigating transport options to respond to
issues that are facing our community. This work
needs financial support.
Catering to changing community expectations
has led to an increase in services and facilities
and council involvement in new areas, for
example welcoming communities, suburban
library hubs, heritage, and town centre
regeneration.

Balancing rates
affordability, our work
programme and debt
We consistently need to strike a balance
between our work programme and the services
we deliver, our rates increases and affordability,
and our debt. Keeping rates affordable and
debt sustainable while managing our assets and
achieving our vision of a vibrant district requires
a delicate balancing act. We have set our rates
increase limit at the local government inflation
rate plus 2% in this plan. We believe this is the
maximum rates increase that is affordable for
our community.

Three waters reform
The government is currently in the process
of reforming the national framework for the
management of drinking water, wastewater
and stormwater (the three waters). While our
assumption is that we retain the three waters,
it is possible that a new entity may take over
running some or all of our water networks.
We expect the government to ask local
authorities to participate in the new delivery
system in late 2021 and the government has
signalled that councils can opt out. If these
reforms occur, it is likely that the new entity will
carry on with our programme. These reforms
would mean that we would no longer be
responsible for the delivery of these services and
this would impact on our finances.
For further information, see our forecasting
assumptions on page 52.
The Government’s reform strategy and timeline
is available at https://www.dia.govt.nz/ThreeWaters-Reform-Programme.

| 14 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Executive Summary

Key issues
There are a number of key issues we are focussing on in the next 10 years.
Whanganui velodrome project
The velodrome facility is a significant Whanganui
community sporting asset set amongst the
multi-purpose Cooks Gardens stadium and
sporting facility. In 1995 it was built to full
international standards and features a wooden
track surface and was once regarded as the
fastest in the country.
Council recognised that the future of the
Whanganui cycling velodrome needed to be
decided. The current wooden cycling track is 25
years old and has deteriorated from exposure to
the weather. Failing boards have been replaced
over time using the stock of matching hardwood
onsite. The level of deterioration of the track has
increased year on year which led to the track’s
closure in February 2021 due to safety concerns
for users.
An independent review of the options for
the future of the velodrome was completed
throughout 2020. This review analysed upgrade
opportunities for the velodrome, including
the membrane roofed multi-use events centre
proposal promoted by the Regional Velodrome
Development Trust. As part of this process, we
were interested in knowing what a minimum
option for a roofed cycling track could look like.
The review produced advice on concepts and
cost analysis.

Following the review, three options were
considered for the velodrome facility and
included in the Long-Term Plan 2021-2031
Consultation Document:
• Decommission
• Roofed velodrome
• Multi-purpose velodrome and events centre
Council’s preferred option in the Consultation
Document was a roofed velodrome with an
expected cost in the order of $20M (range
$18.7M to $22.0M). This option represented the
minimum cost option to cover the velodrome.
Council received a large number of submissions
on the velodrome with a wide range of
arguments presented both for and against.
Following consultation and the hearing of
submissions, the preferred option of roofing
the velodrome was put to a vote at Council and
did not achieve majority support to proceed.
Instead, Council supported the provision of
$2.5M in the budget across years 1 and 2 for
works to the existing velodrome facility.
Youth places and spaces
Ensuring that young people have a voice and are
supported to enhance their wellbeing, belonging
and empowerment forms a key component of the
Leading Edge Strategy and has been championed
by the council’s Youth Committee since its
establishment in 2006.
This group has worked actively to understand the
needs of Whanganui rangatahi and has advocated
strongly over a number of years for improvements
to Whanganui’s youth offerings, particularly in
terms of events and facilities. This mirrors feedback
received through pre-engagement conversations

with our community. People of all ages have told us
that there should be more for our young people to
do and that support for mental health and personal
development, specifically connected to employment,
should be a focus. During the development of He
Irere, a plan for the wellbeing of Maori rangatahi,
we learnt that there is a need for a coordinated
response to improve outcomes for youth.
This aligns with the Youth Committee’s vision for
the establishment of a ‘youth hub’. As a result, a
collaborative group of local stakeholders (including
representatives from the youth sector, Ngā Tai
o te Awa, Sport Whanganui, Ministry of Social
Development, Youth Committee and the council)
has been established to assess the needs for youth
‘places and spaces’ in our district.
We will undertake a scoping needs assessment in
year one which will interrogate the current state
of youth space and place provision. We have
approved $10k in year one and $46k per annum
thereafter for this work and for the ongoing delivery
of the service. Implementation associated with
the needs assessment ‘youth spaces and places’
work has been budgeted for $386,000 in year 2 of
this plan. Options such as physical provision of a
youth hub will be scoped and considered. However,
other options such as shared spaces and outdoor
opportunities will also form part of the review.
Additional programmes to increase wellbeing
may be identified and implemented as the highest
priority.
Davis Library extension
Whanganui district libraries are one of the
council’s most used facilities. The Davis Library
has approximately 250,000 people through its
doors every year, with a further 100,000 using
the other venues and the mobile library; and still
WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 15 |

Executive Summary

others accessing library materials online. The
Davis Library is a well-used public space; a place
to meet, to relax, to chill without the pressure to
buy or consume; to attend or join in events and
activities for children, families and adults, a place
to learn, to do research, or to plan a business. A
non-commercial space for the whole community,
open to all.
Whanganui’s population is growing, and the
library provision for our community is well
below national standards in terms of space
and collections. Improving the provision of
space and collection would ensure we are able
to meet future community needs and ensure
the collections are easily accessible to all.
Extension of the Davis Library would address
part of the existing provision shortfall and future
requirements. It would take total provision in the
district to 80% of the New Zealand standard for
public libraries.
We consider the simplest and most costeffective option is constructing an extension
to the existing library building in its current
location. This will build on the other work
the council has undertaken in the Pukenamu
Queens Park area: the refurbishment of the
Alexander Library, the War Memorial Centre,
the Whanganui Regional Museum and the
redevelopment of the Sarjeant Gallery Te Whare
o Rehua Whanganui.
We have allocated $2.84M across years 2 – 4,
with construction occurring in year 4. $920,000
of grant funding is anticipated as part of the
funding of this project, leaving the council to
fund up to $1.9M.
The Davis Library will be extended, with
additional space to the east matching that on
the west side of the building and further building
partially enclosing the courtyard to the north,
leaving a formal entry to the courtyard and
opening up views to the river and mountain. An
extra 550m2 of space would be added, of which
| 16 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

500m2 is public space. The remaining 50m2
provides much needed space for behind-thescenes activity and storage. This will ensure that
collections are accessible to all – not stacked up
too high or too low, too close together or too
packed to easily browse.
There will be sufficient space for customer
seating, public access internet and online
services, activity space for children’s and family
events, and a dedicated teenager space.
Services throughout the existing library and
extension will be upgraded to meet current and
anticipated future needs, reducing power needs
through better lighting and heating and where
possible sourced through solar panels.
Development and implementation of a
coastal plan
Key challenges we are facing in the coastal
area include erosion, significant natural sand
movement and ecological degradation. The
impact of climate change will cause additional
erosion particularly at Mowhanau Beach. The
dynamic sand movement is adding maintenance
pressure when providing public access to beach
areas particularly when there is a windy season.
There is also ecological and natural values
(native plants and species) that are degrading
and require protection and restoration support.
We anticipate each of these coastal challenges
to become greater over time.
We have sought technical advice regarding our
options for coastal management and the coastal
planning work will allow us to understand these
options and help us to prioritise our response.
Implementation work will primarily focus on the
council managed lands.
Key deliverables of this option will be the
development of a comprehensive coastal plan
for the Whanganui district, with a strong focus
on improving the coastal amenity values and

protecting and restoring the nature that remains
in these areas. Access to coastal areas and
erosion will be considered as part of the plan.
Technical advice regarding our options for
coastal management has been sought from
eCoast e Takutai for the Mowhanau coastal area
and advice has already been received regarding
Castlecliff coastal management options. The
next phase is to prioritise this advice, shape
our coastal plan and begin the implementation
phase, likely to be a staged programme of work.
We have budgeted $50,000 in year 1 to develop
the plan; $1.1M across years 2 to 4, and another
$1.3M across years 8 to 10 for implementation
of the coastal plan. This project is set to reoccur
every 6 years.
This work will improve the coastal enjoyment
and experience for our community and provide
for longer term and more sustainable solutions
to the challenges in this dynamic coastal
environment.

Executive Summary

Other issues
We also have a range of other initiatives, work
programmes and changes planned for the next
10 years.
Waste Management and Minimisation
We are currently working through a
comprehensive review of our Waste Management
and Minimisation Plan (WMMP), as required
by the Waste Minimisation Act 2010. This plan
sets out the council’s vision and objectives for
the district in relation to waste management
and what actions it will take to achieve them.
As part of this process, the council is exploring
the full suite of waste management and
minimisation options for the district, including
kerbside recycling, rural waste and general waste
services. The intention is to deliver a robust and
efficient service to the community that is also
environmentally sustainable.
Whilst the council does not want to pre-empt
the outcomes of the WMMP review process,
it is likely that a proposal to shift the level of
service will be presented to the community
for consultation at the completion of this
WMMP work. Waste services in the district have
largely been provided by the private market
since the late 1990s so that the council – and
therefore ratepayers – have not had to fund
costly infrastructure such as landfills, transfer
stations and waste collection vehicles. However,
as the long- term plan pre-engagement and
other conversations have demonstrated, there is
strong interest from the community to see the
council take a greater lead in waste management
services, especially waste minimisation
initiatives.
At present, there is no rates-funded kerbside
rubbish collection or recycling service in the
urban area. These are currently provided by the
market. In the rural parts of the district there is a
partially subsidised rates-funded bag collection
and drop-off facility in the peri-urban area, along

with a rates funded rubbish drop off service
for the outer rural areas. We are reviewing rural
waste services - the ceasing of the peri-urban
general waste bag collection contract to allow
the market to provide the service is our preferred
option early in the review. This plan removes the
$75,000 annual cost previously allowed for rates
funding of this contracted service.
We will investigate the full rating implications
of any changes in service levels or existing
contracts, while keeping in mind the objectives
of the Waste Management and Minimisation Plan.
Community Housing
Whanganui has an aspirational housing strategy
that sets out the community’s vision and
objectives for the district in relation to housing.
This includes working in partnership to achieve
the best outcomes for all.
Having a home that is safe, warm, dry and
affordable (within a great community) is a
basic requirement. If our residents are housed
appropriately this provides an important
foundation for people to live well and contribute
positively - within their families, communities
and wider district. As a result, improving housing
outcomes is a critical factor in supporting the
needs of our growing, and increasingly vibrant,
district.
As a result of people choosing to move to
Whanganui, we have seen the largest population
growth since 1996. There is a growing need
to rethink Whanganui’s housing stock and
availability - for example, to address the current
shortage of rental properties. However, we also
need a longer-term plan for housing and growth
that meets the needs of everyone in our district.
This is about having good quality, affordable
housing across the board as well as the right
systems in place to achieve this.

to lobby and facilitate - seeking partnership
opportunities locally, as well as nationally, and
calling on the government to tackle existing
housing barriers.
Other opportunities the council is also working
on include:
• Development of a Strategic Housing 		
Investment Plan
• Freeing up of council controlled land
• Investing in more community housing
We have budgeted $500,000 in year 1 and $3.7M
across years 2 and 3 to implement the Housing
Strategy and for potential work in the housing
space. What this looks like will be shaped by
our work over the next few years. Further
consultation with the community will occur in
the future.
Town Centre Regeneration
In 2017 the council adopted the Making
Whanganui Visible Regeneration Strategy.
This strategy is operational and ongoing
implementation is anticipated throughout 20212031. The overall strategic vision for the town
centre is to make Whanganui’s town centre
an active and vibrant place to gather and
spend time for locals and visitors. Town Centre
Regeneration projects endeavour to activate the
town centre in order to support local businesses
and create an attractive space that reflects
Whanganui’s identity and provides healthy
social connections.
This strategy endeavours to make both
Whanganui and its assets and qualities more
prominent both nationally and locally, as well
as proposing to strengthen existing and create
new assets. An increase of $3.3M across the ten
year period has been allocated for town centre
regeneration with variable spend occurring
throughout the ten years.

Whilst working through our housing strategy
it was agreed that the council’s role should be
WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 17 |

Executive Summary

Priority projects include:

Waimarie Trust

• Supporting community and drawcard events
such as Lights on Bikes and Whanganui Walls;
• Community place making initiatives;
• Tram route stage 2 and 3 feasibility study;
• Youth outdoor space;
• Development of Taupo Quay properties;
• Guyton Streetscape;
• Oriental toilets upgrade.

Council approved underwriting of $50,000 for
the vessel out of water survey. This survey is
required every five years and will see the vessel
moved to the banks of the Whanganui River,
adjacent to Kowhai Park.

Airport Control Tower
We have allocated $145,000 in year 1 to ensure
fire compliance of the Whanganui Airport
Control Tower. Remaining funds for interior
restoration and an aviation Museum will be
raised by the Wanganui Airport Control Tower
Restoration Group (Inc).
New Zealand Memorial Museum Trust
– Le Quesnoy
Council agreed to match fund up to $30,000
from the community over years 1-3 to The NZ
Memorial Museum Trust - Le Quesnoy (a nonprofit charitable trust). The Trust is working to
establish a New Zealand Memorial Museum &
Visitor Centre, in Le Quesnoy, France. This will be
a permanent memorial to soldiers who perished
on the fields of Flanders and France.
Whanganui Regional Museum
We have increased our funding to the
Whanganui Regional Museum by $150,000 from
$975,000 to $1.125M per annum. The funding
increase is to enable the museum to increase
marketing activity, to improve the care of its
nationally-important collections; and to enhance
its exhibition and events programmes for the
benefit of the community.

| 18 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Sarjeant Gallery
The Sarjeant Gallery Redevelopment Project
includes earthquake strengthening and
restoration of the existing 100 year old Sarjeant
Gallery; and the addition of a new, modern
wing which will be joined to the rear face of the
Gallery. The Sarjeant Gallery - Te Whare o Rehua
Whanganui, was severely earthquake-prone,
rated at 5% of the New Building Standard (NBS).
The Sarjeant Gallery Redevelopment Project is a
partnership between Whanganui District Council,
Whanganui iwi, central government, large and
small private donors and Trusts.
The new wing will house a temperature and
humidity controlled storage area for the Sarjeant’s
nationally significant permanent collection,
further gallery spaces, an education facility, event
and function areas, staff offices, a board room,
reception area, a café and retail space.
It will honour the memory of Sir Archie Te
Atawhai Taiaroa, for his contribution to
leadership in the Manawatū-Whanganui region
and will be known as te Pataka o Sir Archie John
Te Atawhai Taiaroa.

The Sarjeant Gallery redevelopment project was
included in the 2018-2028 Long-Term Plan. The
redeveloped Sarjeant Gallery is expected to
reopen to the public in mid-2023.
Capital expenditure of $15M in year 1 and
$7.2M in year 2 has been budgeted toward
the remainder of the construction of the
redevelopment. This is offset by $15M of external
funding in year 1 and $2.1M in year 2. Additional
funding has been budgeted across years 2 and 3
for shelving and fittings to house the collection
and salaries to transition the collection into the
redeveloped building. It is assumed this will be
partly funded by grants.

Executive Summary

Financial strategy
– the big picture
The Council’s overarching vision is to be an
affordable and financially sustainable organisation
while at the same time delivering good quality
Council services and promoting growth within the
district. This can be summarised as living within
our means while still contributing to Whanganui
as a great place to live.
We constantly have to balance the range of
services and facilities we provide with the costs
involved in running them. Whanganui is fortunate
to have a great range of public facilities and
good quality infrastructure networks, but
keeping these facilities and networks maintained
to ever increasing standards is putting pressure
on our finances. In achieving this strategy our
focus is on:
• Managing our finances prudently and
sustainably
• Keeping rates at affordable levels
• Managing our assets to maximise value for
money and reduce risk
• Having a sustainable loan repayment
programme
• Improving our financial resilience
• Looking for efficiencies in the way we do
business
• Investigating and pursuing non-rates revenue
streams
• Encouraging sustainable growth

Our key financial limits
To ensure we are sustainable we have set the following limits:

Net debt*

Less than 200% of total revenue**

Rates increases

Rates increases (excluding water by meter, trade waste targeted
rates and penalties) no more than the Local Government inflation
rate plus 2% (after accounting for growth)

* Net debt is defined as total debt less cash or near cash financial investments
** Total revenue excludes development contributions and non-cash items

Our key financial assumptions
Our financial forecasts are underpinned by the following key assumptions:

Inflation

We have used the BERL forecasts of price level changes to
inflation adjust costs in future years of this plan. The forecast
average increase in the Local Government Cost Index over the life
of the plan is 2.6%.

Interest rates

We have assumed interest at 3.8% for year 1 and 3.3% per annum
thereafter.

Population

Rising to 51,200 by 2031 and approximately 55,500 by 2050.

A full list of forecasting assumptions can be found on page 52 of this document.

You can read our full Financial Strategy on
page 107.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 19 |

Executive Summary

What do the numbers
look like?
Over the next ten years:

$1.0B
3.1%

We will spend $1.0B
on our district

We’re looking at
average annual rates
increases of 3.1%

Where the Council gets its money
Our largest funding source is rates which
funds about 62% of our work. Other funding comes from:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Fees and charges (for using some of our services)
Subsidies (such as those for roading from NZTA)
Investment income (from our holding company)
Development contributions (developers contributing toward growth-related capital projects)
External funding such as donations and grants (such as those for the Sarjeant Gallery)
Loans (used to pay for our large capital projects)

Rates - excluding water by meter,
trade waste and penalties, 63%
Fees and charges, 11%
Subsidies, 12%

$132M

Loans raised, 9%
Our net debt will
peak at $146M in
2023/24

Rates - water by meter,
trade waste and penalties, 2%
External funding, 2%
Investment income, 1%

70%

Rates will make up 70%
of our total revenue

Development contributions, 0.7%

One of our major funding sources is NZTA who provide subsidies for our roads. From year 2 of this
plan our subsidy rate is decreasing from 61% to 60%. This adds an average of $238,000 per year to
rates over the ten year period.
We have forecast a substantial level of external funding for some of the community asset projects
in our plan, like the Sarjeant Gallery redevelopment and the Davis Library extension. We are reliant
on external funding to deliver these community projects in order to keep rates affordable for our
community, to meet our limits on rates increases set out in our Financial Strategy, and to manage
our debt levels.

| 20 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Executive Summary

We have forecast reduced investment income in
year 1 and 2 of our plan due to the impacts on
COVID-19 on our holding company’s investments.
There is substantial uncertainty around the
impacts of COVID-19 into the future.

Where the Council spends its money

Demand for land means developers are opening
up new land developments which we need to
provide infrastructure for. We have forecast $9M
of development contribution income over the
ten year period of this plan. We have considered
who benefits from the infrastructure and have
revised our Development Contributions Policy
to ensure that developers and new ratepayers
pay an appropriate share of the cost. Around
half of our infrastructure investment for growth
is anticipated to be repaid by development
contribution income over the period 2021-2031.
Operating costs, 41%
Capital expenditure, 27%
Personnel costs, 19%
Finance costs, 4%
Dept repayment, 9%

Operating our services
We plan to spend $76M per year on average on operating our services.
During the course of this plan we have some changes to our services that affect our operating costs,
like the opening of the redeveloped Sarjeant Gallery in 2023 (from year 3). We are facing increased
costs to maintain our parks and reserves and look after our roads. We are also doing work in a number
of areas like climate change, addressing our housing shortage, and investigating transport options to
respond to issues that are facing our community. This work needs financial support. Even those parts
of our operation that are continuing with business as usual find that costs grow each year because
prices for items such as labour and materials increase. Insurance costs in particular have increased
significantly. These cost increases have partly been offset by lower interest costs due to interest rates
reducing.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 21 |

Executive Summary

Our capital expenditure programme
We have made significant improvements to our
wastewater, stormwater and water networks in
the past 30 years to reduce our impact on the
environment and improve the health of
our people.
We plan to spend $323M over the ten years
of this plan on capital expenditure. Capital
expenditure is primarily funded by loans,
NZTA subsidies for our roads, rates, external
funding sources like grants and donations, and
development contributions.
Years 1 to 4 of the plan have higher capital
expenditure due to the Sarjeant Gallery
redevelopment, works on the velodrome facility,
and the proposed library extension. Many of
our community asset capital projects assume
a significant level of external funding support.

Years 9 and 10 also have an increase in capital
expenditure due to the replacement of the
Dublin Street Bridge. This project is assumed
to be co-funded 60% by NZTA.
We plan to spend $19M on infrastructure related
to growth in the next ten years to address
growing demand. This spending is for the growth
areas identified in the Springvale West and
North West Structure Plans. The cost will initially
be funded by debt, to be repaid in part by
development contributions from developers who
benefit when the land is developed. For further
information, see our Development Contributions
Policy which is being consulted upon alongside
this long- term plan 2021-2031.
Our capital expenditure over the ten year period
is summarised as follows:
Capital Expenditure

Replacing existing assets $210.2M
Level of service increases $94.2M
Growth $19.0M

| 22 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Executive Summary

Managing our debt

We will loan fund $108M of capital projects over the ten year period, but we have planned to repay
$113M of debt over the same period. With these mechanisms in place we expect debt to be $108M by
30 June 2031. This is 86% of our total revenue. That’s the equivalent of a household earning $50,000
per year and having a mortgage of around $40,100.

Debt compared to debt limit (200% of total revenue)

/3
1
30

29
/3
20

/2
28
20

0

9

8
/2
27
20

80%

81%

93%

20

102%

7
26
/2

25
/2

112%

20

6

123%

20

24
/2
20

23
/2

/2
22
20

4

3

Debt

131%

5

135%

135%

109%

20

$300M
$275M
$250M
$225M
$200M
$175M
$150M
$125M
$100M
$75M
$50M
$25M
$0M

2

With these large projects in our sights, our plan
is to keep debt at sustainable levels over the
period of the plan so as not to burden future
generations. A substantial part of achieving this
is our loan repayment programme, along with
the support of external funding to deliver many
of our large capital projects.

Our debt will continue to move higher than we had previously expected and is now expected to peak
at $132M in 2023/24 (135% of our debt limit). We still have substantial available capacity to borrow
within our limits should an unexpected event like a natural disaster occur.

/2

Our plan in our last Financial Strategy was to
focus on reducing our debt balance once the
wastewater treatment plant was built. However
a number of things have changed in the
intervening three years, for example additional
investment in the port redevelopment, additional
population growth requiring infrastructure
investment, and the plan to extend the Davis
Library, do work on the velodrome facility and
implement the coastal plan. We also now have
the replacement of the Dublin Street Bridge
coming into the tail end of this plan period in
years 9 and 10.

Our district’s net debt level is about 109% of our total revenue in 2021/22
That’s the equivalent of a household earning $50,000 per year and having a mortgage of
around $54,600.

21

Major infrastructure work over the past 30 years,
including the separation of the stormwater and
wastewater systems, improved water supply and
the wastewater treatment plant, has provided
our community with assets that will serve for
many decades into the future.

This is the same as the limit in our last Financial Strategy and is well within the requirements of
our credit rating agency Standard and Poor’s and the Local Government Funding Agency.

20

The council uses debt to help pay for longterm assets. Borrowing smooths the impact
on rates for one-off capital projects. It also
spreads the cost of the asset over time so that
the generations that have use of the asset also
contribute to paying for it. Debt is repaid by
other funding sources such as rates, fees and
charges and development contributions.

Debt limit (200% of total revenue)

To ensure we are sustainable we will ensure we
meet the following self-imposed debt limit:
• Net debt is less than 200% of total revenue

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 23 |

Executive Summary

Your rates
Your rates continue to make Whanganui one
of the best places to live in New Zealand. They
enable us to meet the needs of our community
and provide services for our collective benefit
– things that we could not effectively charge
for otherwise. This might be because they are
publicly available but difficult to charge for
(things like parks, roads and street lights) or
because the full charge would be too expensive
for most people to afford (for example,
swimming pools, libraries and art gallery).

average rates increase over the last 10 years is 4.1%.
We are required to set a limit on rates increases
in our Financial Strategy. After looking at our
budgets, considering rates affordability, and
while continuing to provide services to our
community and repay debt, we have set our limit
on rates increases at:
• Rates increases (excluding water by meter,
trade waste targeted rates and penalties) no
more than the Local Government inflation rate
plus 2% (after accounting for growth)

The Council will collect around 60 – 70% of its
annual income from rates (excluding water by
meter, trade waste targeted rates and penalties)
over the next ten years.

The average rate increase to existing ratepayers
for 2021/22 is proposed to be set at 5.7%, the
maximum allowed within our Financial Strategy
limit. This rates increase recognises increasing
support for a number of important strategies

Council has historically kept rates increases low
due to affordability concerns for its ratepayers. Our

Rates increases compared to rates increase limit
5.7%
3.9%

4%
3%

3.5%

3.3%

2.8%

3.3%
2.3%

2.3%

2%

2.0%

2.1%

0

5%

9

6%

1%

| 24 |

/3
1
30
20

29
/3

/2
28
20

20

8
27

/2

7
20

26
/2

6

Proposed rates increase

20

25
/2

5
20

4

24
/2
20

23
/2
20

/2
22
20

20

21

/2

3

2

0%

Rates increase limit

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

and programmes we are committed to such as
climate change, the preservation of heritage
buildings, and town centre regeneration.
It also recognises a significant increase in
business as usual costs like insurance, increased
requirements due to legislation, increased
demands on our assets, and a reduction in
investment income.
On average, we are proposing rates increases of
3.1% over the course of this plan. We meet our
rates limits in all years of this plan.
This level of rate funding will allow us to
maintain the levels of service set out in this
plan, provide for expected growth, and deliver
the projects outlined when combined with
our other sources of income like development
contributions, fees and charges, subsidies and
grants.

Executive Summary

2021/22

2022/23

2023/24

2024/25

2025/26

2026/27

2027/28

2028/29

2029/30

2030/31

Proposed rates
increase*

5.7%

3.9%

2.8%

3.3%

3.5%

2.3%

2.3%

2.0%

2.1%

3.3%

Rates increase
limit

5.7%

4.9%

4.5%

4.5%

4.6%

4.5%

4.6%

4.7%

4.7%

4.6%

*Assuming growth in the rating database of $300,000 per annum.

We are mindful that we need to offer value for
money - our community has limited ability to
pay for services and COVID-19 has added further
financial pressure for some. More information on
what this means for your rates is contained on
page 127.
Our full suite of rates and our rationale for
charging them can be found in our:
• Revenue and Financing Policy on page 94.
• Funding Impact Statement – Rates Information
on page 65.
Balanced budget
We have a ‘balanced budget’ requirement –
that means we must ensure that each year’s
projected operating revenues are set at a level
sufficient to meet that year’s projected operating
expenses. This plan achieves a balanced budget
in every year.

Who pays –
and how do we make the
system fairer?
We are continually reviewing our funding
structure to ensure it works for our community.
Following consultation all of the proposed
changes were adopted by Council in adopting
the Long-Term Plan 2021-2031 and Revenue and
Financing Policy. The changes were as follows:
Definition of Separately Used or Inhabited Part
(SUIP) of a rating unit
We are amending our definition of a Separately
Used or Inhabited Part of a rating unit (SUIP).
The definition change will not change the way
that SUIPs are currently identified, but will
provide further clarity and transparency to
ratepayers. We have clarified what a separate
SUIP looks like, that every rating unit has a
minimum of one SUIP, and that a SUIP is defined
by its capability of being separately used rather
than its actual usage.

Stormwater rating changes
We are increasing the rates differential for
properties that are in the stormwater serviceable
area that are able to connect to the network
but are not currently connected. These are
the properties with soak pits onsite. These
properties currently pay 50% of the rate charged
to connected properties. We will be moving this
to 65% in year 1 of the plan and 75% from year 2
onward.
This change reflects the fact that soak pits are
not able to buffer all stormwater as they have
limited capacity. As climate change increases
the severity of weather events, the overflow
from soak pits is increasingly finding its way via
overland flow paths, watercourses and roads
into the council’s stormwater network. There
is a nuisance factor in these overland flows. In
addition, stormwater on driveways, paths and
other surfaced areas ends up in the stormwater
system, whether there is a soak pit on the
property or not.
We are also changing the stormwater rating
structure for properties in Magnolia Crescent,
Simon Street and Morrell Street area so that
they contribute toward the stormwater system.
WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 25 |

Executive Summary

These properties were previously zoned Rural
Lifestyle and as such had to have soak pits
in place as they were just outside the urban
boundary. Because they were unable to be
connected to the stormwater network directly,
these properties did not meet the definition
of a serviceable property for stormwater
rating purposes and therefore did not pay any
stormwater rates. The properties still utilise
the urban stormwater network via overland
paths, watercourses, swales and roads with the
stormwater ending up in council’s stormwater
network despite the fact that there is no
direct connection. In addition, stormwater on
driveways, paths and other surfaced areas also
ends up in Council’s stormwater system.
Following consultation, Council resolved that
these properties will pay the stormwater rate
with a differential of 0.5 in 2021/22 and then 0.75
from 2022/23 onwards.
Fordell water supply rates
The Fordell water supply will be connected to
the Whanganui city water supply from early
2021. As a result, we will no longer separately
rate for the Fordell water supply from 2021/22.
We have amended the definition of the city
water supply rate to include Fordell, and
transfered the Fordell water ratepayers to
become ratepayers of the city water supply.
Marybank wastewater rates
The Marybank wastewater system will be
connected to the City wastewater system
from early 2021. As a result, we will no longer
separately rate for the Marybank wastewater
system from 2021/22. We have amended the
definition of the city wastewater rate to include
Marybank, and transferred the Marybank
wastewater ratepayers to become ratepayers of
city wastewater.

| 26 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Stormwater separation loans
We have removed stormwater separation loans
from our Funding Impact Statement as all of
these loans will be repaid by 30 June 2021.
Further information
You can read the full Revenue and Financing
Policy on page 85. Our Funding Impact
Statement – Rates Information is on page 60.
Our fees and charges are available on our
website at www.whanganui.govt.nz.

Executive Summary

What does this mean for my rates in 2021/22
Rates will increase by 5.7% on average in 2021/22.
The following table provides indicative rates increases for the average Residential, Commercial,
Farming and Lifestyle properties for 2021/22.
The actual changes in the rates you will pay depends on the type of property you own, its value, land
size, and what services your property has (for example, whether you are connected to the wastewater
system).

Average
land value

Average
capital value

Average
2021/22 rates

$ increase

% increase

Residential

$130,000

$339,000

$3,020

$184

6.4%

Lifestyle

$276,000

$530,000

$2,414

$137

6.0%

Farming

$1,487,000

$1,810,000

$5,521

$190

3.6%

Commercial

$325,000

$1,235,000

$11,795

$387

3.4%

Rates for a number of example properties are
contained in the Funding Impact Statement on
page 82 of this document.
The graph below shows the services we provide
with your rates and how much of the average
residential rate of $3,020 goes toward each of
these services.

The average residential rate for 2021/22 equates
to $58/week. To put this in context, the average
weekly expenditure on various household
services is:

Household service

Amount
per week

Communications
(mobile, landline and wi-fi)

$38

Electricity

$40

Whanganui District Council rates

$58

Transport

$201

How the average Whanganui
residential rate of $3,020 is spent
Community and Cultural, $502
Wastewater, $458
Parks and Recreation, $398
Stormwater disposal, $328
Water supply & firefighting capacity, $307
Community facilities and services, $280
Roads & footpaths, $225
Corporate, $188
Economic Development, $150
Transportation, $101
Earthquake Strengthening, $48
Debt Retirement, $36
WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 27 |

Prospective cost of service statement

Prospective cost of service statement
Annual Plan
2020/21
$000

2021/22
$000

2022/23
$000

2023/24
$000

2024/25
$000

2025/26
$000

2026/27
$000

2027/28
$000

2028/29
$000

2029/30
$000

2030/31
$000

Rates - excluding metered water, trade waste and
penalties

60,959

64,731

67,568

69,731

72,348

75,195

77,227

79,333

81,196

83,200

86,210

Rates - metered water, trade waste and penalties

3,008

2,998

2,998

2,998

2,998

2,998

2,998

2,998

2,998

2,998

2,998

Subsidies

9,173

10,236

9,429

10,683

10,593

10,946

11,295

11,894

12,290

27,466

28,457

Income

User fees and other income

33,579

27,961

15,464

15,299

16,000

14,936

15,116

15,464

16,286

16,729

17,019

Total income

106,719

105,925

95,460

98,711

101,938

104,074

106,636

109,689

112,770

130,392

134,683

Capital funding
Transfer from/(to) special funds

(120)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

New loans

6,156

9,613

23,882

15,354

10,933

7,266

3,493

5,091

3,919

13,827

14,398

Loans repaid

(8,316)

(9,819)

(10,261)

(10,765)

(11,036)

(11,863)

(12,295)

(11,416)

(11,588)

(12,150)

(11,996)

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Total capital funding

(2,279)

(256)

13,570

4,539

(153)

(4,646)

(8,851)

(6,374)

(7,719)

1,627

2,352

Total funding

104,440

105,669

109,030

103,250

101,785

99,428

97,785

103,315

105,051

132,019

137,035

Operating costs

41,077

42,654

44,912

45,962

47,039

48,967

49,796

51,468

53,793

54,779

56,975

Salaries and wages

18,805

19,878

20,752

21,499

21,803

22,370

22,929

23,525

24,160

24,813

25,458

Gross proceeds from asset sales

Costs

Debt servicing
Total activity costs

5,705

4,903

4,661

4,991

5,091

5,042

4,850

4,630

4,430

4,363

4,463

65,587

67,436

70,325

72,451

73,933

76,378

77,574

79,623

82,383

83,955

86,896

Capital expenditure
-to meet additional demand
-to improve the level of service

900

2,950

3,246

5,153

2,877

1,657

1,789

1,240

40

34

0

22,841

21,424

11,944

11,314

10,472

6,510

5,099

5,282

6,950

7,578

7,667

-to replace existing assets

15,112

13,860

23,515

14,332

14,503

14,883

13,322

17,170

15,678

40,452

42,472

Total capital expenditure

38,852

38,233

38,705

30,799

27,852

23,049

20,211

23,692

22,668

48,064

50,139

104,440

105,669

109,030

103,250

101,785

99,428

97,785

103,315

105,051

132,019

137,035

1.4%

5.7%

3.9%

2.8%

3.3%

3.5%

2.3%

2.3%

2.0%

2.1%

3.3%

122,469

121,041

134,662

139,250

139,148

134,551

125,750

119,426

111,757

113,433

115,835

TOTAL FUNDING REQUIREMENT
Rates increase (to existing ratepayers)*
Debt balance**

*Rates increase percentage is shown net of assumed growth in the rating database of $300,000 per annum		
**Opening loans for 2021/22 have been restated from the 2020/21 Annual Plan to incorporate subsequest information		
Reconciling the Prospective cost of service statement to Statement of comprehensive revenue and expense		
The purpose of the “Prospective cost of service statement” (COSS) is to show how much Whanganui District Council spends and how that spending is funded. 		
This statement differs from the “Prospective statement of comprehensive revenue and expense” (SCRE) in that it includes capital expenditure and excludes non cash items, that are not funded.
Total revenue in the COSS excludes Gains from the revaluation of investment properties.		
Total expenditure in the COSS does not include depreciation, but does include capital expenditure and loan/reserve funding.

| 28 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Rates required by activity for 2021/22

Rates required by activity for 2021/22
Revenue
($000)

Operating
costs
($000)

Personnel Finance costs
costs
($000)

Capital
expenditure
($000)

Capital
funding
($000)

2021/22
Rates
requirement1
($000)

2020/21
Rates
requirement1
($000)

Full time
equivalent
staff2

Forecast
Loans at 30
June 2022
($000)

Water supply

(1,574)

3,835

489

427

2,266

67

5,510

5,533

5.8

11,700

Water supply

(1,574)

3,835

489

427

2,266

67

5,510

5,533

5.8

11,700

Stormwater

(664)

1,339

248

1,210

3,212

391

5,735

5,890

3.1

32,451

()

338

34

0

60

0

432

434

0.2

0

Stormwater drainage

(665)

1,677

282

1,210

3,272

391

6,167

6,324

3.2

32,451

Wastewater

(2,813)

6,471

981

1,326

2,160

(283)

7,842

7,833

12.3

30,551

Sewerage and the treatment and disposal of
sewage

(2,813)

6,471

981

1,326

2,160

(283)

7,842

7,833

12.3

30,551

Waterways and natural drainage

Footpaths and berms

(526)

1,345

32

(11)

420

0

1,260

1,241

0.3

(289)

Roading

(10,228)

7,531

517

270

9,618

74

7,783

7,893

5.4

7,467

Provision of roads and footpaths

(10,754)

8,876

549

260

10,038

74

9,043

9,134

5.6

7,178
2,965

Parks and reserves

(485)

5,041

990

108

747

15

6,417

5,455

15.6

Cooks Gardens

(73)

721

171

41

1,417

(1,330)

946

829

2.5

1,786

Swimming pools

0

1,103

29

74

29

300

1,535

1,578

0.4

1,888

(558)

6,864

1,190

223

2,193

(1,015)

8,898

7,862

18.5

6,639

Community development

(52)

1,862

507

9

500

(500)

2,326

1,627

6.0

500

Libraries

(270)

960

1,727

65

380

100

2,962

2,732

24.7

1,743

Parks and recreation

New Zealand Glassworks Te Whare Tuhua o Te Ao

(415)

506

152

3

0

8

253

213

2.6

82

(15,295)

1,349

970

38

15,000

100

2,163

2,008

13.6

1,006

Royal Whanganui Opera House

(64)

327

225

23

208

(156)

564

501

3.5

707

War Memorial Centre

(111)

411

171

78

76

(6)

618

546

2.5

2,148

Whanganui Regional Museum

(35)

1,321

9

33

148

(88)

1,388

1,229

0.1

944

0

0

0

127

100

700

927

918

0.0

3,153

(16,242)

6,736

3,761

377

16,412

159

11,202

9,773

53.0

10,284

Sarjeant Gallery Te Whare o Rehua Whanganui

Earthquake strengthening
Community and cultural
i-SITE Visitor Information Centre

(86)

310

254

0

0

0

478

433

3.8

0

Whanganui & Partners - Economic development

(88)

2,030

953

(16)

0

0

2,880

2,527

9.0

(434)

Economic development

(174)

2,341

1,207

(16)

0

0

3,358

2,960

12.8

(434)

1

Rates excluding metered water, trade waste and penalties

2

In 2020/21 there were 246.5 Full time equivalent staff
WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 29 |

Rates required by activity for 2021/22

Rates required by activity for 2021/22
Revenue
($000)
Cemeteries

Operating
costs
($000)

Personnel Finance costs
costs
($000)

Capital
expenditure
($000)

Capital
funding
($000)

Rates
requirement1
($000)

2020/21
Rates
requirement1
($000)

Full time
equivalent
staff2

Forecast
Loans at 30
June 2022
($000)
886

(581)

744

8

32

79

(40)

241

185

0.1

CBD maintenance

(6)

1,217

0

20

135

0

1,365

1,008

0.0

537

Waste minimisation

(175)

888

0

53

0

100

866

768

0.0

1,408

Pensioner housing

(1,867)

1,599

57

85

90

35

0

0

0.6

2,328

(108)

170

41

4

295

(159)

243

195

0.6

182

0

194

195

25

0

414

410

2.0

3

(24)

769

278

5

0

30

1,057

1,377

3.5

123

Building control

(1,220)

615

1,099

1

0

0

495

551

14.9

38

Resource management

(290)

187

570

0

0

0

467

304

6.4

0

Environmental health

(287)

569

331

0

25

0

639

550

5.1

0

Parking

(1,012)

725

211

5

30

0

(40)

(92)

3.4

131

Community buildings
Emergency management
Environmental policy

Animal control

(613)

620

384

24

35

60

510

393

4.6

620

(6,182)

8,297

3,175

228

714

26

6,258

5,647

41.2

6,257

Airport

(269)

348

105

66

158

85

492

466

2.3

1,770

Port & River

(263)

467

385

495

0

500

1,584

1,644

3.8

13,362

Community facilities and services

Durie Hill elevator

(60)

196

8

10

94

(74)

174

153

0.1

322

Transportation

(592)

1,011

498

572

251

512

2,250

2,262

6.2

15,454

City Endowment property portfolio

(644)

460

164

(3)

8

0

(16)

(48)

1.7

(95)

Investments

(550)

55

0

299

0

550

354

298

0.0

7,950

Investments

(1,194)

514

164

296

8

550

338

251

1.7

7,855

Governance and democracy
Corporate management

0

1,396

689

9

0

55

2,149

2,405

8.0

216

(367)

(6,511)

6,429

(63)

262

250

0

0

78.3

1,142

54

Community and operational property

(80)

1,147

465

Corporate

(447)

(3,968)

7,583

(41,195)

42,654

19,878

658

(528)

1,716

973

5.4

1,750

920

(223)

3,865

3,378

91.7

3,107

38,233

256

64,731

60,956

252.1

Expected carry overs
TOTAL

1

Rates excluding metered water, trade waste and penalties

2

In 2020/21 there were 246.5 Full time equivalent staff

| 30 |

(5,000)

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

4,903

126,041

Consultation

Consultation
The process
Pre engagement
Early engagement for the development of
the plan was extensive. Feedback was sought
through nine community events held in local
venues with staff and elected members on site to
hear from community members. Events included
the Whanganui Home & Lifestyle Show, the
Fest of Cultural Unity and the Whanganui River
Markets. Feedback was also sought through
online surveys to test the Leading Edge Strategy
focus areas and to understand more broadly the
community aspirations.
Brand development
A colourful brand was developed which visually
links to the council’s Leading Edge Strategy
and also references the Connect Four game.
Connect Four is one of the over-sized games the
council has to help create pop-up environments
to attract and engage people. We wanted
to similarly activate spaces throughout the
consultation process for this long-term plan. The
tagline was “Let’s Connect.”
Engagement collateral
Flags, a tablecloth and a pull-up banner were
used at events to help create a dedicated
engagement space. Coreflute information boards
were designed for each of the key consultation
topics. Vehicle decals were designed for council
vehicles that were likely to be used in a range
of community situations. A presentation was
developed for the velodrome public meeting.
The focus of community engagement was on
the four key issues outlined in the consultation
document and other proposed initiatives.

A summary of all pre-engagement discussions
with the community were presented to council
workshop in December 2020.
The consultation and engagement schedule
was designed to meet the Special Consultative
Procedure requirements set out under legislation
(the Local Government Act 2002), and achieve
the following:
• Provide the opportunity for stakeholders and
the community to give feedback on the key
issues and other proposed initiatives.
• Provide the opportunity for public
participation in Council’s decision making
process.
• Contribute to Council’s accountability to the
community.
• Provide details on the Council’s budget and
programme of activity for the 2021-2031 period.
The formal consultation period on the proposed
LTP 2021-2031 ran from 29 March to 30 April
2021. A broad range of methods were used to
engage people in the process and to gather
their feedback on what was being proposed.
The following is a summary of the tools and
techniques used to engage with the community.

The consultation document and all supporting
information were also readily available online
on the Whanganui District Council website
throughout the consultation period.
Submissions
The proposed LTP received a total of 608
submissions1.
Submitters that indicated that they wished
to speak to Council on their submission were
sent information on the hearing process and
what to expect on the day. This information
included where the hearings would take place,
what the process of speaking to Council is, and
also informed them that the hearings would be
livestreamed. Speaking to submissions can feel
intimidating for new submitters so we hoped
that by informing them of what to expect when
they arrived would help make it easier.

Proposed LTP 2021-2031 consultation
documents
Approximately 300 hard copies of the
consultation document were distributed. These
were available at the libraries, , Whanganui and
Partners, the i-site and other Council satellite
locations, Ministry of Social Development, and
local cafes.
Copies of the document were also available at
the seven LTP consultation events that Council
organised.

1

In previous years the number of submissions received were: 2020/21
Annual Plan: 62; 2019/20 Annual Plan: 37; 2018-2028 Long-Term Plan:
121; 2017/18 Annual Plan: 260; 2016/17 Annual Plan: 62; 2015-25 10-Year
Plan: 257; 2014/15 Annual Plan: 511 (Wakefield St Bridge and closure of
WE Pool and Aviary); 2013/14 Annual Plan: 87)
WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 31 |

Consultation

Targeted community
meetings
Velodrome public meeting held at the Wall
Memorial Centre
A formal public meeting was held on the 31st
March 2021 as an opportunity for the public to
hear from council about the proposed options
for the velodrome and the submission process,
and to raise any questions and concerns they
had. The Mayor, most the elected members,
council officers, as well as the consultants were
present at the event to talk to the public.
It should be noted that after this meeting
there was a change to the submission form
to additionally allow submitters to enter their
preferred option for the velodrome should they
disagree with Council’s preferred option.
Davis Library extension held at the
Davis Library
A council stall was set up at the main library
on Tuesday 13th April. This was an opportunity
for the public to talk to the library manager,
other council staff and some elected members
about the proposed extension to the Davis
Library and to find out about the draft LTP and
submission process more generally. Copies of
the consultation document and submission
forms were available and the public were also
encouraged to look on the council website
for more information and to make online
submissions.
Youth places and spaces development at the
Extravaganza Fair
Council officers set up a stall on the first day of
the Extravaganza Fair at Kowhai Park to talk to
the public about the proposal to develop youth
places and spaces in the district. A large poster
display summarised the proposal, including
costs, and copies of the consultation document
and submission forms were also available. There
| 32 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

were also a range of interactive games for kids
and adults to play and several youth committee
members were there to promote the event, and
the draft LTP in general, to young people.
In the lead-up as well as at the event, the youth
committee used social media to spread the word
about the youth places and spaces proposal
to their followers. They explained what the
proposal is and why it is important for young
people to have their say and encouraged them
to make a submission.
Fordell water scheme public meeting at the
Fordell Community Hall
A public meeting was held on the 21 April 2021
as an opportunity for the Fordell community to
talk to council staff about the changes that will
take place in early 2021 in regards to their water
supply and the associated rating changes.
Marybank wastewater rates
A public meeting was held on 26 January as part
of the LTP pre engagement. It outlined proposed
changes to the Marybank wastewater system
and associated rating changes.
Coastal plan development at the river market
Council officers also set up a stall at the River
Traders Market on Saturday 24 April 2021 to
talk to the public about the coastal plan item
in the LTP 2021-2031. A large poster display
summarised the plan proposal, including the
costs, and copies of the consultation document
and submission forms were also available. A
number of council staff and elected members
were there to address any questions or concerns
the public had about the proposal and to
promote the draft LTP in general and encourage
submissions. Youth committee members were
also present to engage young people.
Coastal plan development pop-up in Castlecliff
Councillors were available for an afternoon on
Sunday 11 April at the Castlecliff library hub

to chat to the public about the coastal plan
development and implementation proposal as
well as any other matters in the LTP.
General consultation event
Council officers also set up a stall at Trafalgar
Square Shopping Centre on the 6 April to
enable the public to talk to staff and the elected
members who were there about any of the key
items in the LTP. Large posters summarising
each of the four key items were on display and
hard copies of the consultation document and
submission forms were available to the public.
Youth committee members were also there to
encourage young people to have their say.

Workshops
A workshop on the proposed LTP 2021-2031
was held with the Rural Community Board 7
April 2021 providing the opportunity to discuss
the consultation document, ask questions and
discuss which of the key issues and proposals
they wanted to submit on. The Board elected
to submit online using the submission form
and orally present additional information at the
hearings.

Iwi
Tamaupoko and Tupoho were met with
individually over the period of developing the
proposed LTP 2021-2031. Pre-engagement
discussions were presented to council
through workshop. Focus was on the strategic
framework, updating tangata whenua
content and working on the significance and
engagement policy. Ngāti Apa, Whanganui
Lands Settlement Trust and Ngā Tangata Tiaki
were also encouraged to submit to Council
through the formal submission process.

Consultation

Forums
Council officers promoted the draft LTP 20212031 and consultation process at the Positive
Ageing Forum held on the 31 March 2021.
Officers provided a brief summary of some of
the key issues that council want feedback on,
outlined the processes for making a submission,
and presented the schedule of the in-person
consultation events that were planned. All
attendees were provided with a hard copy of the
consultation document.

Advertising
The proposed LTP 2021-2031 and information
on how to make a submission was advertised
online through Facebook, Instagram, on the
Council’s website, Community Link2 in the
Midweek newspaper, and in the Chronicle and
River City Press newspaper. Media releases3 were
sent to the Whanganui Chronicle; River City
Press; Midweek; More FM; Awa FM; Local Focus;
all staff and elected members, posted to the
website and shared on Facebook and Twitter.
Copies of the consultation document were also
placed at key locations such as council facilities,
cafes and doctor’s offices.
On our website, our Open Cities engagement
module was used to create our long-term plan
dedicated site. This was available during the preengagement period for surveys etc. A ‘spotlight’
on the front page of the website was created
to enable easy access to the consultation
information. The page included information on
the key topics, links to all supporting documents,
the submission form, a timeline and a schedule
of engagement events.
We also used radio advertising and promotions.

2

Feature stories were published on 31 March, 7 April, 14 April, 21 April, 28
April, 12 May

All submissions have been provided to elected
members, and made available to the public
through the Council website. Each submitter
will be advised of the Council’s decision on the
points made in their submission after the final
Long-Term Plan 2021-2031 is adopted.
Submitters were asked how they found out
about the proposed LTP 2021-2031 consultation.
Word of mouth and the newspaper were the
most common methods, followed by Council’s
website and River City Press.

The results

A total of 608 submissions were received, with
78 presenting their submission in person to the
Council. Interestingly, this year 73% of submitters
(of the 459 that elected to answer this question)
indicated that this was the first time they had
submitted to Council.

Council’s response to
submissions
Many submitters focused on the key issues
outlined in Consultation Document. The options
confirmed by Elected Members are highlighted
in the executive summary on pages 11 to 27, and
in our Groups of Activity sections in Volume 2 of
this document.
Submissions identified other areas of interest
and topics and some asked the Council to
support new initiatives which were not identified
in the Consultation Document. In many cases
they were referred through to an appropriate
committee, including:
•
•
•
•
•

Montgomery Reserve name change
Musicians Club
Kia Ora Strategy and Good Food Road Map
Kai Hub
Tramways Trust Project team

3

10 May; 21 April;15 April; 29 March; 24 March

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 33 |

Our District – past, present and future

Our District – past, present and future
Our district
We sit on the south-west coast of the North
Island facing the Tasman Sea, south of Taranaki
and Ruapehu districts, and north of Rangitikei.
Whanganui District Council resulted from the
1989 amalgamation of Wanganui County Council,
most of Waitotara County Council, a small part
of Stratford County Council and Wanganui
City Council.
Whanganui District Council have partnership
agreements with Te Runanga o Tamaupoko and
Te Runanga o Tupoho. Papakainga settlements
are at Pipiriki, Jerusalem, Ranana, Matahiwi,
Koroniti, Atene, Parikino, Pungarehu, Kaiwhaiki,
Te Ao Hou and Putikiwharanui.
The area is known for its river – Te Awa
Tupua, Tikanga (Māori culture), heritage, and
Whanganui National Park.
Te Awa Tupua o Whanganui is a tupuna and
a vital taonga to Whanganui Hapū and Iwi,
recognised and protected in Te Awa Tupua
(Whanganui River Claims Settlement) Act 2017.
The Act reaffirms the inextricable link between
Whanganui Iwi and the Awa, and as per the
whakataukī “Ko au te Awa, ko te Awa ko au”,
Iwi and Awa are considered indivisible from
each other.
In 1991 the name of the river was changed to the
Whanganui River to reflect the Māori spelling.
In 2012 the alternative spellings (Wanganui &
Whanganui) for the urban area were officially
recognised. On 19 November 2017 the name
of the district was officially changed from
Wanganui to Whanganui.

| 34 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

The district has an area of 2,373km². Apart
from the main urban area, there are small rural
settlements at Kai Iwi, Mowhanau, Fordell,
Upokongaro, Maxwell and Mangamahu. All but
some 5,890 people in the Whanganui District
live in the city itself.

Our history
In accordance with Whanganui Tikanga,
everything in the universe, inanimate and
animate, has its own whakapapa, and all things
are ultimately linked to the two primal beings of
Ranginui and Papatūānuku. This includes Te Kahui
Maunga/the cluster of mountains, te Awa/the
river, te whenua/the land and te moana/the sea.
Council recognises that mana sourced in
whakapapa continues since time immemorial in
Whanganui District: “since the fires of Paerangi
were lit”. Customary rights and responsibilities
were not extinguished by the Treaty.
Whanganui’s original discovery is attributed
incorrectly to Kupe, New Zealand’s legendary
discoverer. Upon landing Kupe acknowledged
and saw the “home fires of burning” along
the Whanganui River (est 950AD). Tamatea,
Captain of the Takitimu Canoe, fully explored the
region. Whanganui is the third oldest European
settlement in New Zealand.
The Whanganui River has always been a life
source and an important trade and travel route
for Tangata Whenua. They built seasonal fishing
villages on the banks of the Whanganui tidal
estuary and permanent pa sites and pā tuna
along the river.

European involvement did not occur until 1831
when the first Europeans landed at the mouth
of the river. Formal European settlement began
in 1841, the borough of Wanganui was formed in
1872 and city status was gained in 1924.
The tangata whenua of Whanganui 79 day
reclamation of Pākaitore (Moutoa Gardens)
regarding disputed land ownership, occurred in
1995. The dispute highlighted that issues dating
back to the early European settlement of the
area remained unresolved. This formed the
foundation for the Whanganui District Council,
Tamaupoko and Tupoho relationship agreements,
formalised in 2000.
The signing and celebration of Ruruku
Whakatupua, the Whanganui River Deed
of Settlement, took place at Ranana on the
Whanganui River Road on 5 August 2014. The
settlement focused on the health and well-being
of the Whanganui River, which would become
its own legal entity under the settlement. In
2017 Te Awa Tupua (Whanganui River Claims
Settlement) Bill was passed into legislation.
On 30 August 2019 the Crown and the
Whanganui Land Settlement Negotiation Trust
signed an Agreement in Principle.

Our District – past, present and future

Our people
Whanganui Iwi settlement along the Awa
reaches back to the beginnings of our creation
narratives, which concern the origins of Te Kāhui
Maunga (the cluster of mountains formed in
the Central Plateau area), the Awa and other
waterways. Whanganui Iwi claim descent from
tūpuna which include Ruatipua, Paerangi, and
Haunui-a-Pāpārangi. It is the latter who lends
his name to the Iwi name and affiliation, Te Āti
Haunui-a-Pāpārangi.
Uri of the Awa also whakapapa to three tūpuna
siblings – Tamaupoko, Hinengākau and Tūpoho
– who have land and river rights throughout
the Whanganui River area. As such, Uri are
organised under tupuna rohe that give effect to
this whakapapa. Two of these tūpuna rohe are
within the Whanganui District: Tamaupoko tupuna
rohe is located in the middle reaches of the Awa,
whilst Tūpoho tupuna rohe is situated in the lower
reaches and along the Whanganui coastline. The
third tupuna rohe, Hinengākau, is located in the
upper reaches of the Whanganui River, around
Taumarunui and into the Ruapehu District.
Two other Iwi, Ngā Rauru Kītahi and Ngā
Wairiki-Ngāti Apa, also have interests within the
Whanganui District, as their rohe overlap partly
within its boundaries.
At the 2018 Census, the district had a usually
resident population of 45,309 on census
night (an increase of 3,156 people from 2013).
However, the estimated population count of
the Whanganui District as of 30 June 2020 is
48,100. This more recent figure is the estimated
resident population released by Statistics New
Zealand and takes into account births, deaths
and internal and overseas migration.
The table below shows how our resident
population has changed since 1991. The
population of the district is expected to grow
to a peak of approximately 55,300 by 2048.
WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 35 |

Our District – past, present and future

Population (30 June)

Ethnic groups for people in Whanganui District
90.00%

1991

44,700

1996

46,000

60.00%

2001

44,400

40.00%

2006

43,800

2013

43,500

2018

45,309

2019

estimate 47,300

2020

80.00%
70.00%

50.00%

30.00%
20.00%
10.00%
0.00%

European

Pacific
Peoples

Asian

Other

The median age of the population was 43 years but for the Māori population it was 26 years. The
European population is an ageing population whereas the Māori population has a higher proportion
of young people.

estimate 48,100

In 2018 , 79.2% of the population identified
as European, 26.3% as Māori, 3.6% as Pacific
Peoples, 4.1% as Asian and 1.7% as other.
4

Māori

5

7.1% of our population were Te Reo Māori
speakers.

There were 19,746 dwellings in 2018 with 18,153 being privately occupied. This is an increase of 762
privately occupied dwellings since 2013 (152 new dwelling per year on average).
In 2018, 41.7% of the labour force were in full-time employment and 5.1% unemployed. This compared
to 50.1% and 4% respectively nationally. As a result of the 2020 COVID-19 Pandemic and the
associated level 4 lockdown in March 2020, there was a spike in job seekers and benefit numbers.
In May 2020 job seeker numbers in Whanganui were 30% above the 2019 level.
In 2018, the median income was $24,400, with 9.1% of people earning over $70,000 compared to 17.2%
nationally. Whanganui residents are over-represented in the bands below $40,000 and
under-represented in the bands over $40,000.

4

Place Summaries | Whanganui District | Stats NZ

5

Where a person reported more than one ethnic group, they were
counted in each applicable group.

| 36 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Our District – past, present and future

Our environment

Our climate

Our economy

The District has a land area of 2,373 km2, the
majority of which is hill country, with deeply
incised rivers and narrow valleys. The coastal
lowland areas are marine terraces separated by
old sea cliffs, resulting from a series of uplifts.
Rivers and streams have cut deep valleys into
these surfaces. A belt of sand dunes lies along
the coast and in places, fossil dunes extend up
to seven kilometres inland, overlying parts of the
marine terraces and blocking streams to form
a chain of small shallow lakes. Northwest of
the city, a 45 metre high cliff extends along the
coast fronted by a wide sandy beach.

We are noted for our temperate climate, but
Whanganui’s position on the coast, alongside
a river and with a catchment comprising steep
hill country underlain by soft rock means that
a large number of weather-related events have
been, and will continue to be, experienced.

Whanganui is a diversified economy, the largest
sector being Health Care and Social Assistance.

Coastal, terrace and river valley landscapes are
largely rural in character, dominated by mainly
pastoral farming. Further inland, especially
to the northwest, there is a much greater
proportion of scrub and forest cover.
The Whanganui and Whangaehu Rivers and
their main tributaries flow in a general southerly
direction. A large portion of the District is
within the Whanganui National Park. The park is
administered by the Department of Conservation
and comprises a main core area, with smaller
outliers to the north and south, covering a total
area of 74,231 hectares. The Whanganui River is
the second largest river in the North Island and
the longest navigable waterway in the country,
covering 290 kilometres from the heights of
Mount Tongariro to Whanganui’s coast and the
Tasman Sea.

As a result of climate change, the following
changes to our climate are anticipated:
• Temperatures will rise on average by 0.8°C by
2031-2050 and 1.8°C by 2081-2100
• More hot days >25˚C with the greatest
warming om summer/autumn
• Earlier spring melt and fewer frost days
• Wetter conditions with annual precipitation
up 1% and winter rainfall up 6% by 2031-2050
• Winter rainfall up 11% by 2081-2100
• The frequency and magnitude of storm
related events will increase
• Increased high country erosion
• Increased flooding risks and river
sedimentation
• Increased coastal erosion and flooding
• A sea level rise of by 0.3-1.0m by 2100 and
0.2-0.5m by 2060

Manufacturing is the second largest industry
sector, accounting for over 13% of total GDP.
Whanganui, like the rest of New Zealand, has
been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and
the Infometrics6 forecast does indicate a slightly
less negative impact on the Whanganui Region
compared to the rest of New Zealand. However,
their forecast for a long, hard recovery is still
relevant to note.
Among broad industries, Health Care and Social
Assistance is the largest employer in Whanganui.
Although the pandemic is placing strain on some
industries and greater job losses are being felt
in transport, logistics, accommodation, food
service, recreation and tourism, Whanganui has
experienced the second lowest job losses out of
the sixteen New Zealand regions.
The number of business units in New Zealand
Increased by 1.6% over the period February 2019
to February 2020, with Whanganui recording
similar levels of growth at 1.6%. (Analysis by
Statistics New Zealand February 2020).
Rural sector
Whanganui’s economy has an agricultural
base, mainly sheep, beef and dairy, and has a
strong primary processing sector. Whanganui’s
economic footprint extends well beyond our
district boundary, with products and services
flowing to and from Whanganui into neighboring
districts and townships.

6

Infometrics Analysis dated 24.11.2020

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 37 |

Whanganui: Leading Edge

Whanganui: Leading Edge
The Leading Edge Strategy acts as Council’s
overarching strategic document. It’s an umbrella
document which sets the vision for the district
and outlines high level aspirational objectives
supported by a series of actions. It feeds directly
into the Long-Term Plan and is intended to focus
Council on its key strategic commitments.
The strategy takes a district wide focus and
is not solely the responsibility of Council.
As a result, in order for it to be successful
a collaborative approach is required. While
the strategy focuses on Council’s role, it also
highlights the need to partner with others in the
district.
The Leading Edge Strategy can be found on the
Council website under ‘Publications’.
Pre-engagement on the Long-Term Plan involved
consideration of the Leading Edge Strategy.
We asked people if we were still focusing on
the right things and how this related to our
Community Outcomes. This feedback supported
development of the draft plan and will also
inform an ongoing review of Council’s strategic
framework. This is about helping Council to be
as targeted as responsive as possible to our
community’s aspirations for the future.
This process verified our Community Outcomes
and confirmed that the overarching Strategic
Direction for the District remains as follows:

| 38 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Vision:

To be an
energised,
united and
thriving district
offering
abundant
opportunities for
everyone.
Vision summary: We want to be confident
leaders and influential trailblazers. We are
comfortable with being a ‘bit different’ and
not following the pack because this sets the
scene for the types of innovative approaches
that we will continue to front-foot. This
strategy is about Whanganui being seen as
positive and exciting – a community that is
united, connected, creative, environmentally
rich and economically prosperous.

Whanganui: Leading Edge

Strategic pillars

COMMUNITY

CONNECTIVITY

A deeply united community

Connected

Strategic intention: We are a place resounding with community spirit
and there is an underlying essence that underpins what it means to be
from or in Whanganui. We support each other, work in partnership, are
resilient and can handle challenges. We keep talking to each other and
are pulling in the same direction. We know where we are heading but
celebrate and champion diversity. Our roots run deep.

Strategic intention: We are outward-looking and constantly seek
to expand and enhance our world view – positioning ourselves and
raising our image regionally, nationally and internationally. We make
sustainable connections – through our network infrastructure, digital
capacity, expansive ideas and external relationships. We are accessible,
linked in and known for it.

Goal: Working in partnership – shaping a district that celebrates and
champions its cultural and social diversity as well as its community
spirit.

Goal: A dynamic, broadly connected district that is accessible, linked in
and known for it.

Key elements – this section covers our intentions in relation to:
• Planning and working together with Iwi in mutually appropriate ways.
• Partnership approaches.
• Meeting our obligations arising from the Te Awa Tupua
(Whanganui River Claims Settlement) Act 2017/
• Securing our district’s health, safety, belonging and wellbeing.
• Celebrating and championing diversity.
• Strong, positive and empowering leadership.
• Transparency and accountability.
• Providing sport and recreation facilities and opportunities.

Key elements – this section covers our intentions in relation to:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Harnessing the connectivity opportunities provided by technology.
Transport accessibility.
Improving our image and reputation.
Working together as a region.
Achieving key benchmark standards.
Continuous improvement and education.
International relationships.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 39 |

Whanganui: Leading Edge

Strategic pillars

CREATIVITY

Innovative and creative

Strategic intention: We are innovative, entrepreneurial, go-getters – we
actively attract industry, support start-ups and are a lightning rod for
ideas and creativity. Our arts community and heritage sets us apart –
giving us soul and heart. We are sharp economic operators and hum
with cultural personality.
Goal: A knowledge economy driven by innovation and humming with
cultural personality.
Key elements – this section covers our intentions in relation to:
• Protecting and promoting our culture and heritage.
• Innovation and productivity – including in relation to business and
entrepreneurial opportunities.
• Sustaining and nurturing our arts reputation.
• Developing a dynamic knowledge economy and workforce.
• Attracting talent and creativity.
• Events.
• Making the downtown area more vibrant.

| 40 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

ENVIRONMENT
Safeguarding our place

Strategic intention: We draw strength from our rich tapestry of rivers
which sustain and shape us. We are a district with beautiful integrated
design, bountiful and valued natural resources and a sense of life and
vitality. It feels positive here and there is a lot going on. Our wealth is
abundant and we take a broad view of what this means. We play on
our strengths and make our own opportunities – trumpeting our unique
identity through placemaking that flows from the mountain to the river
to the sea. We are eco-rich, showcase and safeguard our heritage and
always keep an eye on the future.
Goal: A district that safeguards its natural resources and provides an
environment with a sense of place, identity and vitality
Key elements – this section covers our intentions in relation to:
• Capitalising and building on the value of our river and coastal
location.
• Preserving our heritage.
• Urban design, placemaking and landscape approaches.
• Our identity and community pride.
• Maximising our rural assets and identifying opportunities for
sustainable growth.
• Preserving and conserving our natural resources.
• Sustainability and ‘green’ solutions.
• Asset management and our infrastructural network.
• Growth of the district.
• Increasing our resilience to climate change.

Whanganui: Leading Edge

Strategic pillars

ECONOMY

Works for everyone

Strategic intention: We provide boundless opportunities and are
truly a place of choice for all. We are thriving and loaded with jobs,
development and lifestyle appeal meaning that anyone can and will
want to call us home. We are welcoming, empowering and enabling –
supporting everyone to flourish.
Goal: An easy-living place of choice for all – flourishing with
employment and development opportunities.
Key elements – this section covers our intentions in relation to:
• Making sure that our services and facilities reflect the diverse and
changing needs of our community.
• Facilitating economic development initiatives through partnership
approaches.
• Investing in our young people through training, education and
employment opportunities.
• Population attraction and retention.
• Retaining key health and social infrastructure.
• Enhancing our lifestyle advantages.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 41 |

Whanganui: Leading Edge

Council’s contribution to
the Leading Edge Strategy
and achievement of
our vision

Some projects/initiatives and their relationship to our Leading Edge vision
Community Outcomes
and strategic pillars

We continue to build on our community’s
commitment to become more united, connected,
innovative, creative, environmentally rich and
economically prosperous. These intentions
will be further supported by our Community
Outcomes – outlining what we want to achieve,
together, for our district. These act as a
foundation piece for our strategy and help to
focus and drive our strategic framework.
These aims will be supported by the key projects
we have planned over the next 10 years. At the
heart of this vision is a commitment to working
together to ensure that our district truly works
for everyone.
The following projects and initiatives will
contribute towards our Leading Edge
commitments, while also delivering on our
Community Outcomes.

| 42 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Quality of life
Connections to each
other, our place and
the world

Project/initiative

A deeply united
community

Effective engagement with hapu and iwi
Suburban revitalisation initiatives
Welcoming Communities programme
Supporting the development of hapu/marae/community
plans
Implementing our Housing Strategy
Investigating a Youth Hub – places and spaces
Delivering on our Age Friendly commitments

Connected

Implementing our Digital Strategy
Continuing to enhance cycle and pathway connections
Growing education and training opportunities
Promoting all our district has to offer

Innovative and
creative

Sarjeant Gallery redevelopment
Library hubs
Encouraging innovation, entrepreneurialism and start-ups
Delivering events
Implementing the Arts and Culture Strategic Plan
Celebrating the richness of our arts, heritage and design

Safeguarding
our place

Coastal plan development and implementation
Town centre revitalisation
Implementing our Climate Change Strategy
Working with Iwi on Te Awa Tupua aspirations, including
the whole of river strategic plan
Completing and delivering our Waste Minimisation and
Management Plan
Continuing to support and develop the rural sector

Works for
everyone

Rejuvenating and increasing economic activity at the
port in partnership with iwi
Implementing our Economic Development Strategy
100% SWEET initiatives
Cluster opportunities in our industrial precinct

Community pride in
our unique identity

Whanganui: Leading Edge

Purpose statement
Our purpose statement communicates the
Council’s role as kaitiaki (guardian) and
trumpets the Awa as our seed for settlement
and the shaper of our existence. It also reflects
the Council’s interests in sustaining wellbeing
through the performance of regulatory functions,
highlights the ‘big three’ drawcards that will
attract people to Whanganui (education,
lifestyle, commerce) and encourages retention
of our key points of difference. It applies a dual
focus to the things we are good at and the
things we can be good at. It is also concerned
with what we are currently doing rather than
where we want to be (which is the role of the
vision statement).

Mission
To partner with the community to create a
flourishing and leading edge district that truly
works for everyone.

Purpose
Statement
Sustaining

the safety and welfare of our
community.

Supporting

richness and opportunity through
education, lifestyle and commerce.

Preserving

our exceptional heritage and
infrastructure.

Protecting

our environment and awa.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 43 |

Council controlled organisations

Council controlled organisations
Section 6 of the Local Government Act 2002 (the Act) defines a council controlled organisation (CCO)
and Schedule 10 of the Act requires the following disclosures to be made in relation to each CCO.

Whanganui Airport Joint Venture (WAJV)
The Joint Venture Airport is a 50/50 joint venture between Whanganui District Council and the Crown.
It has been operating the Whanganui Airport since the late 1950s. Part of the financial information is
included within the main financial statements of the Council. Under the Act, WAJV is classified as a CCO.
WAJV objectives
WAJV’s primary objectives are to:
• Provide high quality facilities and service commensurate with existing levels of aviation activity and
in accordance with all the appropriate Acts, Regulations and Rules pertaining to airport and aviation
operations in line with the size of Whanganui Airport.
• Operate the airport in a sound and business-like manner.
• Improve the long-term value and financial performance of the airport while improving the economic
value of the airport to Whanganui.
Nature and scope of activities
• The airport provides takeoff, landing, ground handling and passenger terminal facilities for
scheduled airline services.
• It also provides a base for commercial, training and recreational aviation activity.
• The ongoing development of aviation and associated services and infrastructure is subsequently
intended to support activity, business and employment.
• Reduction of the current loss position to ‘break even’ or to a level acceptable to the partners in light
of the CCO’s economic value to Whanganui.
• Compliance with all aspects of Part 139 of the Civil Aviation Rules with a minimum of one
requirement per inspection.
• Delivery of an activity plan and subsequent achievement of the individual targets outlined within
that plan.

| 44 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Whanganui District Council
Holdings Limited
Whanganui District Council Holdings Limited
(WDCHL or the Company) was formed in March
2002 to provide a commercial overview of the
Council’s investment portfolio. The Company is
100% owned by Whanganui District Council (the
Council). WDCHL owns 100% of the shares in
GasNet Limited and 100% of the shares in New
Zealand Commercial Pilot Academy Limited.
The Company provides a monitoring service to
Council for the following activities:
• GasNet Limited
• New Zealand International Commercial
Pilot Academy Limited
• Whanganui Port
Key performance targets
WDCHL’s intended performance targets for the
planned period are:
• To meet the dividend expectations of its
shareholder while still maintaining sufficient
cashflows to meet its own working capital
needs.
• To facilitate its subsidiary Companies to
achieve the performance targets identified in
its Statement of Intent.

Council controlled organisations

Company objectives
The Board intends to operate as a successful business in relation to its
investments and to the monitoring roles assigned to it under contract by
the Council.
The objectives relating to the ownership of the company are to oversee
individual investments and to advise Council on:
• The mix of investments in the portfolio
• The risk of investments in the portfolio
• The management of individual investments
in the portfolio
• The overall strategy for investments in the portfolio
• To identify opportunities to enhance investments and returns
• To identify potential new investments that meet council investment
objectives
• To identify opportunities to sell investments that no longer meet
Council’s investment objectives
• To identify appropriate structures that may better enhance focus and
management of particular investments
It is the sole responsibility of Council, by resolution, to purchase or sell
assets owned by WDCHL.

New Zealand International Commercial
Pilot Academy Limited (NZICPA)
NZICPA’s parent entity is Whanganui District Council Holdings Limited, a
Council Controlled Organisation of Whanganui District Council. Therefore
the company is a Council Controlled Organisation as defined by section 6 of
the Local Government Act 2002.
NZICPA objectives
NZICPA’s primary objectives are to:
• Achieve an acceptable rate of return on WDCHL’s investment in NZICPA,
monitor NZICPA’s performance through regular reporting and take
appropriate action when adverse events occur.
• Provide suitable accommodation and aviation assets for NZICPA that
meets its requirements and WDCHL’s investment expectations.
Nature and scope of activities
The Company’s business will primarily be to provide flight instruction
to both national and international students and to undertake such
other matters as shall be determined by the Board, in conjunction with
Whanganui District Council Holdings Limited.

WDCHL has a 100% interest in GasNet Limited, New Zealand International
Commercial Pilot Academy Limited and Whanganui Port General Partner
Limited, which is owned by the company.
In addition, WDCHL has a 50% interest in Kākaho General Partner Limited
and Kākaho Limited Partnership. The Limited partnership was set up to
purchase buildings to be used by NZICPA.
Nature and scope of activities to be undertaken by the Company
The Company’s business will primarily be to hold shares in GasNet Ltd and
other subsidiaries or undertakings transferred to the Company, to provide
strategic planning advice to Council when required and to undertake such
other matters as shall be determined by the Board, in conjunction with the
Council.
GasNet Limited is not a CCO according to section 6 of the Act as it is an
energy company.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 45 |

Council controlled organisations

Whanganui Port
The Whanganui Port operations involves three
entities:
• Whanganui Port General Partner Limited
(WPGPL: 100% owned by WDCHL)
• Whanganui Port Operating Company Limited
(WPOCL: 100% owned by WPGPL)
• Whanganui Port Limited Partnership (WPLP:
Council is the Limited Partner and WPGPL
is the General Partner. The Crown has a
convertible loan interest in the Partnership.)
The establishment of the Whanganui Port
entities involved the transfer of Council Port
assets, the Harbour Endowment property
portfolio and cash to the WPLP.
Objectives
The objective relating to the ownership of the
Port assets are to:
• Oversee the rejuvenation and continued
viability of the Whanganui port
• Operate the port in a sound and business-like
manner
• Improve the long-term value and financial
performance of the port while improving the
economic value of the port to Whanganui
While the long-term objective of the port
investment is to provide financial returns, initially
this investment is for strategic purposes such
as retaining local businesses and providing
opportunities for new businesses to invest
in Whanganui.

| 46 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

In addition to the above objectives, the following
objectives relate to the ownership of the
Harbour Endowment property portfolio:
• To provide revenue for harbour maintenance
operations
• To help fund infrastructure for harbour
development
• To maintain the value of the portfolio
• To maintain investment in land and property
• To enhance opportunities for economic
development on a commercial basis
• To act as a prudent investor
The Harbour Endowment requires that funds
must be invested in property. However,
proceeds from investment must be used for
harbour purposes. Not all properties within
the Harbour Endowment are regarded as
investment properties as some are used for
operational purposes or are owned for strategic
reasons. Proceeds from property sales for the
Harbour Endowment are not used for harbour
maintenance but remain in the capital fund for
the purchase of property.

Council policies and
objectives relating to CCOs
Council does not have any significant policies
in regard to ownership and control of the
organisations. Council has a policy on the
appointment and remuneration of directors,
which is available on request.

Building community with tangata whenua

Building community with tangata whenua
Council works with Tangata Whenua/Hapu and
Crown legislated Iwi to build community, in
a mutually appropriate way. This approach is
especially important in infrastructure planning,
environmental management and development.
Council’s policy direction and planning processes
take into account effective engagement with
Hapū and Iwi entities - as well as marae and
whanau as required. Hapū have indicated that
they wish to be specifically engaged in relation
to activities within their rohe, rather than just
consultation with the Iwi body at large. This will
allow for the Voice of Hapū to be heard clearly
and the values and effects to be considered at
the source. Hapū hold their own mana motuhake
within their rohe and legislated Iwi and Crown
entities will not impede or interfere in this Hapū
sovereign right.

The Treaty of Waitangi
Due to differing interpretations of Te Tiriti o
Waitangi, the Waitangi Tribunal applies a set
of principles based on what Te Tiriti o Waitangi
stood for, which have been adopted into law.
Council has obligations under the Treaty of
Waitangi principles. The main principles are:
Partnership
Both the Crown and Iwi agree to act towards
each other with good faith. The obligations of
partnership include the duty to consult Tāngata
Whenua.
Reciprocity
The partnership is a reciprocal one. Tāngata
whenua ceded to the Crown kāwanatanga of
the country in return for a guarantee that Tino
Rangatiratanga (full authority) over their land,
people and taonga would be protected.

Autonomy
The Crown guaranteed to protect Tāngata
Whenua autonomy.
Active protection
The Crown’s duty to protect Tāngata Whenua
rights and interests is not merely passive,
but extends to active protection and full
consultation.
Equal treatment
The Crown is required to treat all Iwi/Hapū fairly
and not advantage one Iwi/Hapū over another
if their circumstances, rights and interests are
broadly the same.
The collective Hapū of Tamaupoko and Tupoho
hold mana motuhake (tikanga autonomy) within
the Whanganui District Council Catchment area.
The Treaty is incorporated in the statutory
scheme administered by Council: this includes
the Local Government Act 2002 and the
Resource Management Act 1991, in particular.
Council recognises that mana sourced in
whakapapa continues since time immemorial in
Whanganui District: “since the fires of Paerangi
were lit”. Customary rights and responsibilities
were not extinguished by the Treaty. The entities
with whom Council is bound to acknowledge
and work with range from papatupu Marae
and Hapū, to Rūnanga and statutory Iwi
organisations. The constituents of all these
entities have a shared whakapapa and will advise
Council at all times about matters of shared and
sometimes exclusive responsibilities under mana
motuhake.

Tangata Whenua Iwi
Partnerships
Partnership agreements exist between Council
and Te Runanga o Tamaupoko and Te Runanga o
Tupoho.
Te Whakarauhitanga o Te Tangata Relationship
Document between Te Runanga o Tupoho and
Whanganui District Council states:
Te Runanga o Tupoho and the Whanganui
District Council, will act as a collective and
responsible leaders in pursuing the initiatives
stated in the relationship document 2015 - 2020,
moving towards a more positive and progressive
future that will benefit whanau, Hapu, Iwi and the
wider community.
The Relationship Document 2020 between
Te Runanga o Tamaupoko and Whanganui
District Council states:
The purpose of this relationship is to foster
the well-being of our people, including
guardianship and development within and
beyond the Tamaupoko rohe, which may
include Whanganui city. Te Runanga of
Tamaupoko and the Whanganui District Council
first entered into a documented relationship in
May 1998. The basis for the relationship was
reviewed in late 2011 and again in 2018.

Engagement between the Crown and Iwi, within
the settlement process, has provided a statutory
platform for Crown legislated Iwi authorities.
WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 47 |

Building community with tangata whenua

Te Awa Tupua (Whanganui
River Claims Settlement)
Act 2017
The settlement of the River claim between the
Crown and Whanganui Iwi provides legislative
direction for Council to meet its responsibilities
to the River, the land and the people.
Ngā Tangata Tiaki o Whanganui, was set up
under a trust deed in 2014; and, established as a
statutory Iwi authority under the Te Awa Tupua
Act 2017, in which the Awa is deemed a legal
personality.
The Te Awa Tupua (Whanganui River Claims
Settlement) Act recognises at law a set of
intrinsic values called Tupua te Kawa - the
natural law and value system of Te Awa Tupua,
which binds the people to the River and the
River to the people. The four kawa (values) must
be read together.
KO TE KAWA TUATAHI:
Ko te Awa te mātāpuna o te ora
(The River is the source of spiritual and physical
sustenance)
Te Awa Tupua is a spiritual and physical entity
that supports and sustains both the life and
natural resources within the River and the
health and well-being of Iwi, Hapū and other
communities of the River.
KO TE KAWA TUARUA:
E rere kau mai te awa nui mai i te kahui maunga
ki Tangaroa
(The great River flows from the mountains to the
sea)
Te Awa Tupua is an indivisible and living whole
from the mountains to the sea, incorporating the
River and all of its physical and metaphysical
elements.

| 48 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

KO TE KAWA TUATORU:
Ko au te Awa, ko te Awa ko au
(I am the River and the River is me)
The Iwi and Hapū of the River have an inalienable
interconnection with, and responsibility to, Te
Awa Tupua and its health and well-being.
KO TE KAWA TUAWHĀ:
Ngā manga iti, ngā manga nui e honohono kau
ana, ka tupu hei Awa Tupua
(The small and large streams that flow into one
another and form one River)
Te Awa Tupua is a singular entity comprised
of many elements and communities, working
collaboratively for the common purpose of
the health and well-being of Te Awa Tupua.
Council is one of four local authorities charged
with responsibilities within the Region to make
appointments to Te Kōpuka. The Act provides
for Te Kōpuka, to be a strategy group. It is a
permanent joint committee for administrative
purposes.
The Act provides for partnership to encompass
customary rights and responsibilities as well as
good practice within Council’s jurisdiction.

Whanganui Land
Settlement Negotiation
Trust
The Crown and the Whanganui Land Settlement
Negotiation Trust (WLSNT) reached agreement
in principle and signed matters for agreement
in relation to the comprehensive settlement
of all historical Treaty of Waitangi claims. The
agreement lists a series of objectives, including
the Crown’s acknowledgement that, where
appropriate, any breaches of the economic,
social, cultural and political wellbeing of the
claimants will be recognised. It also states that
the settlement will provide a platform to assist
the development of an economic base. This will
have an economic impact on our community,
alongside other positive outcomes that will

enrich the community socially and culturally. This
is reflected in the WLSNT’s vision: “Whanganui
will be a positive and responsible tribal nation
with the capability to act and live as a tribe
that is vibrant, strong, robust and prosperous
culturally, socially, environmentally and
economically.” 7

Current activity
Relationship development
The Local Government Act 2002 provides for
Māori to participate in the decision making
processes; and, for Council to contribute to
capacity building for that to be effective.
Council has a responsive, issue focused,
working relationship with the collective Hapu
of Tamaupoko and Tupoho, claimants, and
with post settlement governance entities. At
the same time, to maintain consistency to
work together, regular meetings are scheduled
throughout the year with Iwi, Hapū and Statutory
Iwi authorities.
It is a requirement of good faith that Hapu and
Iwi are informed at the concept stage of any
policy or major infrastructure development.
This will be done in a way that is equivalent,
transparent and robust.
In the final outcome there is likely to be seven
post settlement governance entities emerging
from the settlement processes under the Office
of Treaty Settlements.
Partnership agreements are in place with
•
•

Te Rūnanga o Tamaupoko
Te Rūnanga o Tupoho

Te Rūnanga o Tūpoho is the Tikanga mandated
Iwi authority within the Tupuna Rohe o Tūpoho.
This is recognised by Council distinct from other
entities who engage with Council.

7

Source: Te Runanga o Tupoho Governance Manual

Building community with tangata whenua

Statutory Iwi relationship activity is with

Te Ao Māori – the Māori Worldview

•
•
•
•
•

Respecting the Māori world view is important for
effective engagement. The Māori world view
(te ao Māori) acknowledges the
interconnectedness and interrelationship of all
living & non-living things.

Ngā Tāngata Tiaki
Te Kaahui o Rauru
Te Rūnanga o Ngā Wairiki Ngāti Apa
Ngāti Rangi
Whanganui Land Settlement
Negotiation Trust

Other formal relationship documents
In June 2017 Council entered into the Te Matapihi
ki Tangaroa Accord alongside Te Rūnanga o
Ngā Wairiki Ngāti Apa, Te Kāhui o Rauru, Te
Rūnanga o Tupoho and Ngā Tāngata Tiaki o
Whanganui. “Te Matapihi ki Tangaroa” literally
means “the window to the ocean” and refers to
the area towards the Whanganui River mouth.
This partnership represents a shared commitment
between Hapu, Iwi and the Council in protecting
the marine environment and contains a number
of objectives. In terms of infrastructure provision,
the effective operation, management and
monitoring of the new Wastewater Treatment
Plant is a critical and shared concern.
Tangata Whenua and Iwi participation
activities
• The Pākaitore Historic Reserve Board
administers Pākaitore (Moutoa Gardens).
The members are appointed by Iwi, the
Council and the Crown.
• Whanganui Resource Recovery Centre
– Council has a partnership with Tupoho
Whanau Trust and Sustainable Whanganui in
the operation of the Centre.
• Sarjeant Gallery Trust
• Whanganui Regional Museum
• Te Manu Atatu – the Whanganui Māori
business network
• Whanganui and Partners Board
• Accelerate 25
• Whanganui Holdings Limited
• Tamaupoko Charitable Trust
• Whakawhanake (Waitangi Day
commemorations)
• Whanganui Maori Regional Tourism
Organisation (Puanga)

The mauri model is a decision making framework
that combines a tangata whenua assessment
of worldviews, with an impact assessment of
indicators to determine sustainability and trends
over time.

Ko Ta Whanganui Titiro:
Whanganui Holistic
worldview
Whanganui Hapu and Statutory Iwi viewpoint is
holistic and requires flexibility and willingness
to work beyond the requirements of the RMA.
An example of this is that one of the indigenous
measures for the health of the Whanganui River
is the health of the people of the Awa (and vice
versa). This reflects a different view based on
Whanganui Kawa and Tikanga.
Economic development
There is an expectation by Hapū and Statutory
Iwi in particular that economic development
strategies will incorporate their tikanga, kawa
and kaupapa.
Partnerships with Māori tourism, and events will
be actively explored to be further enhanced to
be a greater point of difference with Whanganui
as a destination respecting the narratives. Other
opportunities for working together will be
explored.

this will be a city scape that incorporates a
Whanganui Tangata Whenua visual presence.
This will provide opportunities also to manifest
the history and identity that is sometimes
exclusive and sometimes shared. Whanganui
will be distinguished with a point of difference
on which to build wider relationships for a
prosperous and vibrant community.
Hapū management plans
The benefits of building relationships with Hapū
through supporting Hapū to develop Hapū
Management Plans include:
•
•
•
•

Providing Council with an opportunity to
meet Hapū members kanohi-ki-te-kanohi;
Demonstrating to Hapū that Council mean
what they say in both professional and
practical terms;
Assisting Hapū in a very real and practical
way; and
Reducing the likelihood of misunderstandings
and poor communication.

Council also encourages Hapū/Iwi to lodge
any Hapū/Iwi Management Plans with any
government department or agency that Iwi
wish to work with (Health Board, Department
of Conservation, Transport Agency, Regional
Council, local authorities and others).
Resourcing the necessary engagement with
Hapū must be provided by the Council,
department or agency involved.
Council encourages and supports the
development of Hapū Management Plans to
identify the values and important resource
management issues that need to be protected
and considered in Council decision-making.

Arts and Culture
Arts and culture, including Te Aranga urban
design principles8, and the public art strategies
will be informed by Hapu and Statutory Iwi
narrative to integrate them. An outcome of

8

Set of outcomes-based principles founded on Maori cultural values
and formulated to provide practical guidance for enhancing outcomes for the design environment.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 49 |

Building community with tangata whenua

Marae development
Marae and Hapū communities are the repository
of Tangata Whenua indigenous customary
practice, and maatauranga knowledge. Their
significance is sourced deep in their whakapapa
to Ranginui and Papatuanuku and their
relationship with the waters, land, air - “Ko wai
koe?” – “From which waters are you?”. In this
regard, they are a taonga in the national interest.
It is appropriate that Council partners with the
funding sector to contribute to the maintenance
and development of marae. Marae are under
the jurisdiction of Te Ture Whenua Act, yet
provide a unique public function to benefit the
whole community through hospitality, education,
whanaungatanga and community work. Marae
are also a resource for emergency management
support services. Hapū are able to approach
Council directly to discuss marae development
proposals.
Te Puni Kokiri and Department of Internal Affairs
allocate funding for marae development through
Oranga Marae.
Papakāinga
Council encourages papakāinga development in
the District. Policy is included in the District Plan
to harmonise the realities of customary practice
with the Resource Management Act 1991. This
also relates to the administration of the Ture
Whenua Act 1993 by the Māori Land Court.
Te Puni Kōkiri is provides advice, support and
access to funding for papakainga development
projects to Māori land trusts.

Tongi Tawhito and Wahii tapu
- sites of significance
Council has a responsibility to assist Tangata
Whenua with appropriate protection and
acknowledgement of their Tongi Tawhito (sites
of significance) and wāhi tapu. A nomination
and registration process under the District Plan
can be developed with Hapū and Statutory Iwi
to take into account Hapū based tiakitanga; as
well as the interests of private property where
that is relevant and requires solutions. This item
will require effective engagement with Hapū; as
well as key public sector agencies, for example,
Heritage New Zealand and the New Zealand
Archaeological Association.
Hapū and Statutory Iwi
Responsiveness framework
A responsiveness framework has begun to be
developed to align with and inform the strategic
direction of Council. It is about combining
worldviews and will include information about
activities to be scheduled for delivery. These will
sit across the operations and services delivered by
Council. It will be updated with Tangata Whenua/
Hapu. This process will enhance Council’s capacity
to meet the Kawa and Tikanga expectations of
Hapū in a mutually appropriate way.
Cultural development programme
for the organisation
A Te Runanga o Tupoho initiative “Collaborative
Culture Programme” is in it’s early stages and
includes teachings of:
•
•
•
•
•
•

| 50 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

te reo me ona tikanga,
indigenous customary activities,
Te Tiriti o Waitangi
Te Runanga o Tamaupoko and Te Runanga o
Tupoho Hapu mana motukahe
Whanganuitanga - Declaration of Nationhood:
Whanganui Position Statement 1994
Statutory Iwi Deeds of Settlement and values

A schedule has begun to deliver activities to
support and foster bi-cultural competency
for all staff across Council. The purpose is
to encourage understanding and enhance
effectiveness for all Whanganui District Council
Staff when working with whanau, Hapu and
Statutory Iwi. From the drop-in/phone-call
stage through to strategies, policies and
economic partnerships.
It is envisaged to be a three (3) year journey to
complete across Council. It will also help Council
to formulate a range of content to Council’s Staff
induction process and inform the development
of a Cultural Tool Kit.
Māori language policy for Council
Māori is an official language of New Zealand. It
has the status of a taonga under Article II of the
Treaty of Waitangi. Council has a fiduciary duty
to participate in the retrieval, acquisition and
maintenance of te reo Māori.
The Crown produced the Māori Language
Strategy in 2014. The principles of the Strategy
align with the, expectations of Tangata Whenua
and Council’s objectives to engage effectively
with Hapū and Iwi in the District, thus:
i.

Whakamana whānau, whakapiki Hapū and
Statutory Iwi: strengthening the focus on
whānau Hapū and Statutory Iwi;
ii. Kia tu rangatira i te ao: strengthening Hapu
and Statutory Iwi leadership;
iii. Mahi to tika: supporting effective, efficient
and co-ordinated government.
These principles will be incorporated into a Te
Reo Policy for Council. Framework advice and
evaluation will be provided by Te Taura Whiri i te
Reo Māori and Te Puni Kōkiri. The framework will
be developed collaboratively with Whanganui
Hapū and Statutory Iwi.

Prospective financial information

Prospective financial information

Assumptions
Funding impact statement
Prospective statement of comprehensive revenue and expense
Prospective statement of financial position
Prospective cash flow statement
Prospective statement of changes in net assets/equity
Prospective statement of reserve funds
Notes to the financial statements
Long-term plan disclosure statement

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 51 |

Assumptions

Assumptions
Significant forecasting assumptions and risks
Schedule 10, section 17, of the Local Government
Act 2002 (the Act) requires that Council
identifies the significant forecasting assumptions
(assumptions) and risks underlying the financial
estimates in its Long-Term Plan. Where there
is a high level of uncertainty surrounding the
assumptions, Council is required to state the
reason for that level of uncertainty and provide
an estimate of the potential effects of the
uncertainty on the financial estimates provided.
Council has made a number of assumptions in
preparing this 2021-2031 Long-Term Plan. These
assumptions are necessary as the planning term
covers 10 years and the assumptions ensure
that all estimates and forecasts are made on the
same basis.
The prospective financial information contained
in this 2021-2031 Long-Term Plan is underpinned
by the assumptions that the Council reasonably
expected to occur as at 30 June 2021. The
assumptions are made on the basis that there is
an average of 21,150 ratepayers in the district.
Actual results are likely to vary from the
information presented and these variations may
be material. This financial information should not
be used for any other purpose.

| 52 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Assumptions

Forecasting assumptions
Population growth – The
population of the district is
expected to rise to 51,200 by
2031 and approximately 55,500
by 2050.

Risk
That population growth is
lower than projected.

Level of
uncertainty
Medium

Financial
materiality
Low

Population growth can be affected by a number
of factors, including net migration, births, deaths
and the trend for people to live in smaller family
groupings.
Revenue from rates growth and development
contributions may not be accurately forecast and
costs of new infrastructure could fall onto existing
ratepayers.

Dwelling growth is predicted to
be between 130 and 140 new
dwellings per year.
During the 30-year planning
timeframe for the Infrastructure
Strategy household sizes are
predicted to drop from 2.3
to 2.2

Reasons and financial effect of uncertainty

A decline in population could result in a reduction
in the number of rateable properties and affect our
ability to set rates at a level that is affordable to the
community.
That population growth is
higher than projected.

Medium

Medium

Significantly higher population growth could require
the extension of infrastructure into increasingly
difficult and costly subdivisions, with cost increases
being funded out of debt.
Planned infrastructure works and associated costs
may need to be brought forward.

Resource consents – Conditions
of resource consents held by
Council will not be altered
significantly.

Work is not performed
in accordance with the
conditions of the consent.

Medium

Medium

Conditions of Council held
resource consents are
reviewed and altered.

Low

Medium

Breaches of resource consent conditions may result
in increased costs and/or legal action taken against
Council; however, the specific extent of any breaches
or legal actions cannot be accurately quantified
prior to their occurrence.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 53 |

Assumptions

Forecasting assumptions

Risk

Inflation – The financial
information is based on the
following adjustments for
inflation. Council has used
the BERL forecasts of price
level changes to calculate a
weighted average inflation
rate for each year of the plan.
Where expenditure is subject
to inflation, the following rates
have been applied:
2021/22
0%
2022/23
2.9%
2023/24
2.5%
2024/25
2.5%
2025/26
2.6%
2026/27
2.5%
2027/28
2.6%
2028/29
2.7%
2029/30
2.7%
2030/31
2.6%

That actual inflation will be
significantly different from the
assumed inflation.

Interest – Interest paid on term
debt is calculated at an average
rate of 3.8% for year 1 and 3.3%
per annum thereafter.

That interest rates will change
from those used in the
calculations over the period of
the Long-Term Plan.

Level of
uncertainty

Financial
materiality

Low
(Years 1-3)
Medium
(Years 4-10)

Low
(Years 1-3)
Medium
(Years 4-10)

Reasons and financial effect of uncertainty
Inflation is affected by external economic factors.
Council’s costs and the income required to fund
those costs will increase by Council’s average rate of
inflation.
While individual cost indices will at times vary from
what has been included in this plan, the Council has
relied on the Reserve Bank use of monetary controls
to keep inflation within the 1 to 3% range.
Where the actual inflation differs from the assumed
inflation the cost of the activity will differ. Lower
inflation may result in Council reducing the funding.
Higher inflation may increase the funding.

Medium

Medium

Interest rates on borrowed funds are largely influenced
by factors external to the New Zealand economy.
Council mitigates interest rate uncertainty through
the use of interest rate swaps and other derivatives.
Based on Council projected debt levels, interest
costs will increase or decrease annually by $1.2M
-1.4M per year for every 1% movement in interest
rates. A significant change in interest rates could
affect the amount of funds available to Council.

| 54 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Assumptions

Level of
uncertainty

Financial
materiality

Forecasting assumptions

Risk

Reasons and financial effect of uncertainty

Interest rate risk management
Council continues to manage
interest rate risk with a neutral
effect by effectively fixing
a large portion of its debt
portfolio.

Interest rates move in a
downward direction with
Council unable to take full
advantage of this movement.

Medium

Low

As Council’s policy is to effectively fix its interest
rate on a large portion of its debt portfolio, a
movement in interest rates would have a minimal
impact in interest costs or savings.

Raising debt
Council can raise debt at any
time.

That Council cannot raise debt
as and when required.

Medium

Medium

Council funds debt from bank credit lines and from
issuing local authority stock, either through private
placement or through the New Zealand Local
Government Funding Agency. Market conditions
may impact on lenders’ ability to continue to fund
Council debt.
New Zealand local authority stock market is
dominated by a small number of significant
purchasers. Overseas markets are prone to
fluctuations in demand for investment in a given
Country’s securities. Market conditions may result
in purchasers of local authority stock withdrawing
from the market for a period. This means that in the
short term Council may have to use cash reserves
or investments in place of debt. In the medium term
Council may have to delay/suspend current projects.
In the long term additional funding sources would
have to be found or the Council budget would have
to be reduced to what could be funded from current
revenues.
The effect on projects would depend on the value
involved and the extent to which Council could not
fund from internal sources.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 55 |

Assumptions

Forecasting assumptions

Risk

New Zealand Transport Agency
(NZTA) requirements and
specifications for the grant
of subsidised work will not
alter, and that all work in the
submitted programme to NZTA
will be approved.

Changes in subsidy rate and
in criteria for inclusion in
subsidised works programme.
Not all work in the programme
submitted to NZTA will be
approved resulting in that
work not proceeding.

Level of
uncertainty
Medium

Financial
materiality
Medium

The NZTA subsidy rate Council
has used in the Long-Term Plan
is 61% in year 1 and 60% from
year 2 onward.

Reasons and financial effect of uncertainty
NZTA funding priorities may change as a result of
the Land Transport Management Act 2003 and its
focus on delivering the key outcomes of integration,
safety, sustainability and value for money. Variations
in subsidy are possible through implementation
of the New Zealand Transport Strategy and
Government Policy Statement on NZTA funding.
A 1% decrease in subsidy will increase Council’s cost
annually by $238,000 on average over 10 years or
$11.25 per ratepayer based on 21,150 ratepayers.
Alternatively there may be a reduction in service.

Whanganui District Council
Holdings Limited dividends
Council is forecasting to receive
$500k in years 1-2 and $1M for
each year thereafter.

That Council will not achieve
the forecast rates of return.

High

Medium

We have forecast reduced investment income in year
1 and 2 of our plan due to the impacts on COVID-19
on our Holding Company’s investments. There
is substantial uncertainty around the impacts of
COVID-19 into the future.

Funding sources
Council has assumed it will
receive certain levels of user
charges and grants in addition
to loan funding as sources of
funds for significant assets.

Projected revenue from user
charges and external financial
assistance is not achieved.

Medium

High

A significant impact from changes in funding or
funding sources may result in a revised capital work
programme, or changes in the level of user fees and
charges, borrowing or rating requirements.

Levels and sources of funding
differ from those forecast.
The external funding level
assumed for the Davis library
extension ($920k) is unable to
be achieved.

Medium

Medium

Low

Low

Council has secured loan facilities in addition to
a strong credit rating from an international credit
rating agency. It is unlikely that it will be unable
to source loan funding for future replacement of
significant assets.
User charges and grants have generally been
increased by the assumed rate of inflation over the
10 year period of the plan. Some price increases may
affect the demand for services and adversely impact
on Council forecast user charge income.
Council will reconsider proceeding with the
construction of the Davis Library if external funding
of $920k is unable to be achieved.

| 56 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Assumptions

Forecasting assumptions

Risk

Level of
uncertainty

Financial
materiality

Reasons and financial effect of uncertainty

Asset life
Assets do not necessarily
fail at the end of their design
life. An asset is considered to
have failed if its performance
does not meet expected
serviceability requirements.

Earlier than planned asset
failure.

Asset data knowledge
Council has an accurate record
of assets to enable good
decision making.

Incorrect asset data resulting
in incorrect expenditure and
loss of service potential.

Low/Medium

Medium/High

Over the past few years Council has been
undertaking extensive modelling of its infrastructure
networks to improve data information on the
condition of its assets. However, where data
information remains incomplete, or is inaccurate,
there is potential for over-investment or underinvestment in assets.

Timing of capital projects and
accuracy of cost estimates

Capital projects are delayed or
take longer to complete than
estimated.

Medium

Medium

Delay in completing projects could result in an
escalation of costs in addition to Council not being
able to deliver required levels of services.

Actual capital project costs
are significantly under or over
budget.

Medium

Medium

Significant variances of actual capital costs to
budgeted capital costs may result in either:
• Over-collecting revenue from various sources,
such as development contributions, fees and
rates; or.
• Funding shortfall, placing additional pressure on
Council resources, such as borrowings and rates.

That capital projects will be
completed within the projected
timeframes and budget cost
estimates.

Low

Medium/High

Assets are assessed on their criticality and likelihood
of failure and risk ratings are established to prioritise
and optimise investment programs.
Capital replacements may need to be brought
forward in the event of asset failure affecting
interest costs and levels of debt.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 57 |

Assumptions

Forecasting assumptions

Risk

Revaluation of non-current
assets
From time to time we revalue
our assets to understand
how much they are worth.
Through our planning, we make
assumptions about how much
we think the assets will be
worth when they are revalued.
Council has used the BERL
forecasts of price level change
adjustors for each year of the
plan. The following rates have
been applied to the appropriate
asset types:
Year applied Water
2022/23
5.5%
2025/26
8.4%
2028/29
9.6%
Year applied Buildings
2023/24
9.4%
2026/27
7.8%
2029/30
8.2%
Year applied Roading
2022/23
7.4%
2025/26
9.1%
2028/29
9.0%
Year applied Investment
properties
properties
2021/22
3.7%
2022/23
2.9%
2023/24
2.5%
2024/25
2.5%
2025/26
2.6%
2026/27
2.5%
2027/28
2.6%
2028/29
2.7%
2029/30
2.7%
2030/31
2.6%

Price level changes may not
be in line with BERL forecasts
resulting in a big difference
between how much we
thought the asset would be
worth and how much it is
actually worth.

| 58 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Level of
uncertainty
Medium

Financial
materiality
Low

Reasons and financial effect of uncertainty
Revaluations are impacted by information available
on asset conditions. As better information on asset
condition is obtained revaluations may differ from
those calculated in this Plan.

Assumptions

Level of
uncertainty

Financial
materiality

Forecasting assumptions

Risk

Reasons and financial effect of uncertainty

Depreciation on planned asset
acquisitions – Asset condition
is as per Council’s detailed asset
register with the following
average depreciation rates
being used for planned asset
acquisition:

Actual wear and tear of
assets will not mirror current
depreciation rates.

Low

Low

Council has an asset management planning and
improvement programme in place. Asset capacity
and condition is monitored, with replacement
works being planned in accordance with standard
asset management and professional practices.
Depreciation is calculated in accordance with normal
accounting and asset management practices.

The expected demographic
changes do not transpire in
the predicted areas, impacting
on the provision of services
for the area and the district as
a whole.

Low

Low

The district’s projected demographic profile
was taken into account in preparing the asset
management plans, service plans and activity plans.
A significant change in the projected profile could
impact on the provision of age specific service
delivery and infrastructure, which may become
obsolete or underutilised sooner than anticipated.

Infrastructure
Roading network
- 4.1%
Wastewater system - 1.9%
Stormwater system - 1.4%
Water system
- 2.2%
Airport runway
- 10%
Buildings & improvements
- 2%-20%
Other fixed assets
- 10%-33%
Changes in society – Based
on the projected demographic
profile of the district this plan
assumes:
• an aging population,
• an increase in ethnic
diversity, although at a lower
rate than the rest of New
Zealand,
• an increase in the Maori
population,
• the district’s ethnic make-up
will remain predominantly
European and Maori.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 59 |

Assumptions

Level of
uncertainty

Financial
materiality

Forecasting assumptions

Risk

Reasons and financial effect of uncertainty

Potential climate change impacts
Whanganui expects:
• Average temperatures to rise
by 0.8˚C between 1986-2005
and 2031-2050 with some
seasonal variations; and by
1.8˚C between 1986-2005 and
2081-2100.
• Wetter conditions with annual
precipitation up 1% between
1986-2005 and 2031-2050
and winter rainfall up 6%; and
by 4% between 1986-2005
and 2081-2100 and winter
rainfall up 11%.
• Sea Level Rise of 0.2m-0.4m
by 2060 and 0.3m-1.0m rise
by 2100.
• This will increase the
frequency and magnitude of
storm-related coastal flooding
and erosion.

Planning has not adequately
accounted for climate change
impacts and the associated
cost.

Medium

Medium

Accretion, sedimentation of the river, greater
flooding, impacts on coastal environment and
settlements, increased stormwater flooding, higher
river levels, increased groundwater levels and hill
side erosion and impact on resources to manage
events. Infrastructure damage may affect the levels
of maintenance in any one year or replacement
timeframes may be varied as a result.

Carbon credits
That Council will not receive
any carbon credits or pay any
charges through the Emissions
Trading Scheme.

Government changes to
Emissions Trading Scheme
rules.

Medium/High

Low

The previous Government reviewed the Emissions
Trading Scheme providing uncertainty over its
future, applicability and effect on Council. There are
two main services that potentially trigger Emissions
Trading – landfill gases and forestry. Council’s
old landfill has insufficient gas emission to be of
concern whilst Council’s forestry holding potentially
triggers carbon credits or charges for Council. The
quantum and eventuality of any credits or charges
is dependent on any changes to the scheme
implemented by the current Government.

Shared services
Council partners with other
agencies to deliver services in a
cost effective manner.

Partnerships do not deliver
the desired outcomes.

Low

Low

External factors may impact on provider’s ability to
deliver services at the expected level.

The desired outcomes are
delivered at an increased cost.

Low

Medium

There are existing agreements between Council and
other agencies for the delivery of services.
Non delivery could result in an increased cost to
Council or an unexpected drop in service levels.

| 60 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Assumptions

Forecasting assumptions

Risk

Central government
Council is unable to confidently
predict any Government
statutory or policy changes.
Therefore this plan assumes
Council is operating under the
current regime of statutory and
policy provision.

There are unexpected
changes that alter the services
provided by Council.

Three waters reform
This plan assumes Council
continues to provide three
water services to the
community for the full period of
the plan.

The shift to regionalised
water service provision
arrangements has the
potential to be significant in
scale, impact core role and
functions of the Council and
our finances.

The Government is looking
into reforming three waters
services (water, wastewater and
stormwater) across the country
into a small number of multiregional entities who may take
over the running of some or all of
our water networks.

Level of
uncertainty

Financial
materiality

Medium/High

Medium/High

Changes in Central
Government Policy occur and
place additional compliance
requirements on councils and
communities to comply.

Uncertainty remains until
multi-agency discussions have
progressed.

Reasons and financial effect of uncertainty
Could have significant financial impact on resources
to meet legislative requirements and require
changes to service delivery/organisational form.
Council’s response to legislative changes would be
consulted upon during future annual and Long-Term
Planning.

High

High

Levels of uncertainty exist due to the discussions
still to occur between multiple agencies determining
the scale of change and level of impact.
The potential financial impacts of the transfer of
the three waters to a multi-regional water service
delivery entity are:
•
•
•
•
•

Loss of annual operating revenues of $25M
Loss of annual direct operating costs of $12M
Annual overheads to be reallocated of $2M
Value of assets transferred of $420M
Value of debt transferred of $75M

At this stage we have agreed
to work with the Government
to share information. A fully
developed reform proposal is
not yet available to bring to the
community for the Long-Term
Plan 2021-2031.
We expect the government to ask
local authorities to participate
in the new delivery system in
late 2021 and the government
has signalled that councils can
opt out. If we opt in, we would
no longer be responsible for
the delivery of the three waters
services and this would impact
on our finances.
WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 61 |

Assumptions

Forecasting assumptions
Water Services Regulator
Council is yet to fully
understand the impacts and
outcomes for Whanganui
following the introduction of
new water services regulator
Taumati Arowai.

Risk

Level of
uncertainty

Financial
materiality
Medium

Reasons and financial effect of uncertainty

There is a greater level of
service expected to be
provided by Council from
years 3-5 onwards.

Medium

Any Government changes to legislation result in
appropriate Council response during future annual
and Long-Term Planning.

Earthquake strengthening of
buildings
It is assumed a budget of $7.2M
over this Long-Term Plan will be
sufficient for planned work on
Council-owned buildings.

That the costs of earthquake
strengthening Council-owned
buildings within the next 10
years will exceed the $7.2M
to be raised and that the
costs cannot be funded out of
normal budgetary provisions.

Medium

Medium

Council continues to review the seismic strength of
our buildings, with a program of works scheduled on
a priority basis. As we obtain a better understanding
of the physical seismic work required for each
building we are able to place a greater level of
confidence on the budget allocations. For the
first few years of our Long-Term Plan we are able
to place a reasonable level of confidence on our
estimated seismic costs, with less accuracy able to
apply to buildings scheduled to be upgraded in later
years.

Insurance
It is assumed Council’s assets
are adequately covered for loss.

That the insurance market
continues to suffer as a result
of recent natural disaster
events and that the cost of
insurance continues to rise.

Medium

Low

The effect of the Christchurch earthquake has seen
substantial cost increases for insurance and issues
with obtaining cover at all. Council continues to get
insurance for significant assets, and will continue to
self-insure lower value assets.

Levels of uncertainty remains until implementation
at central government has progressed further.

Expectation is that an
increasing level of service will
be required for water services.
Scale and timing of service level
change is yet to be determined.
This plan assumes Council is
operating under the current
regime for three waters service
provision to the community for
the full period of the plan.

| 62 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Assumptions

Level of
uncertainty

Financial
materiality

Forecasting assumptions

Risk

Reasons and financial effect of uncertainty

COVID-19 Pandemic
It is assumed that there will be
ongoing resurgences of the
COVID-19 virus in New Zealand
communities and changes in
Alert Levels until a vaccine
is developed and rolled out
from late 2020 and potentially
beyond. The repercussions will
adversely impact the local and
national economy over the next
5-8 years and households will
have constrained budgets. This
plan assumes no further extended
periods of nationwide lockdown.

That the impacts on
Whanganui community
economy and unemployment
are greater than anticipated
and that impacts are longer
term.

High

High

An event of this nature has not been experienced
in recent history and therefore there is a great level
of uncertainty. Although the economic impact in
Whanganui may not be as great as in other parts
of the country to date, there will be a contracting
of the economy and higher unemployment.
Government assistance is likely to continue to be
made available but the impacts on communities are
likely to be more severe each time Alert Levels are
escalated.

Natural hazard events
There will be natural hazard
events e.g. flooding, landslides,
severe winds that cause
localised damage about every
3-5 years which will be funded
from a combination of debt,
rates and insurance.

There are natural hazard
events more often than
expected risk assessments.

Medium

High

Although Council has faced natural disaster events
in the past, and coped adequately, climate change
predictions are that some events could become
more frequent and more intense. The potential
effect of a natural disaster on Council’s financial
position is dependent upon the scale, duration and
location of the event. Central government assistance
and insurance contracts would reduce some of the
Council’s financial risk. Emergency Management
plans and legislation allow for Government
assistance where communities are unable to cope
with the emergency relief and recovery works.

Earthquakes
The risk of a significant
earthquake in the period of this
Long-Term Plan that causes
damage to Council assets is
considered low. However, the
risk within the next 20 years is
considered moderate to high.

A significant earthquake
strikes that causes major
damage to Council and
community assets.

Low

High

Although the likelihood of Whanganui experiencing
a significant earthquake that causes major damage
is low, recent earthquakes in Christchurch and
Kaikoura have highlighted the extent of damage
that can occur. As with all natural hazard events
Emergency Management plans and legislation allow
for Government assistance where communities
are unable to cope with the emergency relief and
recovery works.
Emerging research is focussing on the increased risk
of a very large regional earthquake off the coast of
the lower North Island, as well as the overdue Alpine
Fault event.
WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 63 |

Assumptions

Forecasting assumptions

Risk

Level of
uncertainty

Development contributions
Growth will occur at the
projected rate and in the
projected order.

Development contributions
are not recovered to match
expenditure of network
upgrades.

Medium

Port
The plan assumes that the
Council will have transferred
its port related assets and
operations, including the
Harbour Endowment land
portfolio, to Whanganui Port
Limited Partnership by 1 July
2021, in exchange for units in
the partnership.

That the final port
revitalisation project does
not receive the required
Government approval and
therefore funding is declined.

Low/Medium

| 64 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Financial
materiality
Medium

Reasons and financial effect of uncertainty
Council has undertaken careful planning of growth
demand projects so that expenditure and recovery
match predicted market demand.
However if growth projections are inaccurate
budgets may be insufficient or inappropriate for the
level of actual growth, or sufficient development
contributions revenue may not be gathered, leaving
ratepayers to fund the deficit in the interim.

Low

If the final port revitalisation project is not
approved by the Government, the port and Harbour
Endowment assets and operations will remain with
Council. The overall financial impact on rates would
be nil, however the project would either not go
ahead, or be considerably reduced in scope without
the $12.2M of Government funding.

Funding impact statement

Funding impact statement
Background

For the purposes of clarity, every rating unit has
a minimum of one SUIP.

The rates requirement figures quoted in the
sections below include GST at the current GST
rate of 15%.

Differential categories

Small movements to the indicative rates for
2021/22 stated in this document may occur as
the Rating Information Database changes to 30
June 2021 and will be reflected in the final rates
resolution.
The Council will not invite lump sum contributions
for any rate.

Definitions
Separately used or inhabited part of
rating unit (SUIP)
The Council defines a Separately Used or
Inhabited Part of a Rating Unit (SUIP) as
any part of the rating unit capable of being
separately used or inhabited by the owner or
any other person who has the right to use or
inhabit that part by virtue of a tenancy, lease,
license or other agreement. At a minimum, the
land or premises intended to form the separately
used or inhabited part of the rating unit must
be capable of actual habitation, or actual use by
persons for purposes of conducting a business.
In a residential situation a separately used or
inhabited part will only be classified if all of the
following apply:
•
•
•
•

separate kitchen including a sink
separate living facilities
separate toilet and bathroom facilities, and
separate access (including access through
a common area such as a lobby, stairwell,
hallway or foyer etc.)

percentages will have small movements between
this document and the final rates resolution,
and from year to year as the Rating Information
Database changes.

Where councils propose to assess rates on a
differential basis, they are limited to the list of
matters specified in schedule 2 of the Local
Government (Rating) Act 2002. Council is
required to state which matters will be used
for what purpose and the categories of any
differentials.

Allocation of activities
to rating groups

The list of activities and the funding mechanisms
used are included in the following table, along
with some explanation of the terminology
used. As part of the consideration process
and to form a sound basis for establishing any
differential rates, the Council considered how the
rates funded activities should be apportioned
to different rating groups. The Council uses
three generic rating groups for consideration
of allocation. Those groups are commercial,
farming and residential. As the step between
residential and farming is so large the Council
has determined that the transition is based on
the size of the property and there is an even
transition from full residential rate to farming.
For the purposes of Council consideration, the
residential group includes any property less
than three hectares and the farming group any
property not a commercial property greater than
three hectares.

proportion to the number of units in each rating
group. Units are based on the number of SUIPs,
with a minimum of one unit per property.

The allocation of activities to groups is achieved
using the Rating Information Database corrected
as at 30 June each rating year. The list of
activities and the allocation basis used for each
are included in the table below, along with the
indicative resulting percentage allocations for
the 2021/22 rating year based on the Rating
Information Database as at February 2021. The

Council has four types of allocations to rating
groups:

Unit means that the activity has been split in

CV2 means that the activity has been split in

proportion to the capital values of the groups,
with commercial properties being attributed
200% of their capital value. This loading for
commercial properties has been made to reflect
what Council believes to be a more equitable
split for the activity. The loading applies to
environmental related services and reflects
the commercial gain that is obtained through
inspection and certification for commercial
premises.

CVU means that the activity is attributed to

commercial and residential properties only
according to the proportion of capital value for
the groups. These activities have been allocated
in this manner because there is little or no
benefit attributable to farming properties.

Special means that the activity requires a

special allocation to ensure equitable funding
of the activity. The allocation to rating groups is
based on a decision of Council.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 65 |

Funding impact statement

Allocation to groups
Activity

Basis

Commercial

Farming

Residential

Airport

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Animal management

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Building control

CV2

27.6%

16.5%

55.9%

Cemeteries

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Central Business District maintenance

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

City Endowment

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Community

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Community and operational property

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Community buildings

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Cooks Gardens

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Durie Hill elevator

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Emergency management (Civil Defence)

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Environmental health

CV2

27.6%

16.5%

55.9%

Environmental policy

CV2

27.6%

16.5%

55.9%

Governance

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Investments

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

i-SITE Visitor Information Centre

Special

61.0%

7.0%

32.0%

Libraries

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

General rate activities

| 66 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Note:
• Pensioner housing and Corporate
Management have no rates input.
• Water supply, Stormwater and Wastewater
are not differentiated into commercial,
residential or farming groups. The rates
for these activities are differentiated
based on usage of the service to ensure
equity and for efficient revenue collection.

Funding impact statement

Allocation to groups
Activity

Basis

Commercial

Farming

Residential

New Zealand Glassworks
Te Whare Tuhua o Te Ao

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Parking services

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Parks and reserves

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Port and river

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Resource management

CV2

27.6%

16.5%

55.9%

Royal Whanganui Opera House

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Sarjeant Gallery
Te Whare o Rehua Whanganui

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Swimming pools

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

War Memorial Centre

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Waste minimisation

Special

20%

30%

50%

Waterways and natural drainage

CVU

19.8%

0.0%

80.2%

Whanganui & Partners
– Economic Development

Special

61.0%

7.0%

32.0%

Whanganui Regional Museum

Unit

8.5%

7.7%

83.8%

Footpaths and berms

CVU

19.8%

0.0%

80.2%

Roading

Special

36%

32%

32%

Roads and footpaths rate activities

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 67 |

Funding impact statement

Uniform annual general
charge – amount to be
collected $15,541,400
A Uniform annual general charge (UAGC) set
under section 15 of the Local Government
(Rating) Act 2002, as a fixed amount per
Separately Used or Inhabited Part of a Rating
Unit of $700.00.
The UAGC funds a portion of the general
rate. It is not based on a calculation of part
of any activity costs but is assessed to be a
reasonable amount to charge.

General rate – amount to be collected $24,964,566
A differential general rate, set under section
13 and 14 of the Local Government (Rating) Act 2002, on the land value of each rating unit
as follows:
Indicative
cents in the
dollar

Differential
ratio

1.2975

1.67

less than 0·5 hectares

0.7791

1.0

greater than or equal to 0·5 hectares but less than 1 hectare

0.6881

0.88

greater than or equal to 1 hectare but less than 2 hectares

0.5970

0.77

greater than or equal to 2 hectares but less than 3 hectares

0.5059

0.65

greater than or equal to 3 hectares but less than 4 hectares

0.4149

0.53

greater than or equal to 4 hectares but less than 5 hectares

0.3238

0.42

greater than or equal to 5 hectares but less than 10 hectares

0.2327

0.30

greater than or equal to 10 hectares

0.1417

0.18

Commercial
Properties used for commercial or industrial purposes
Properties not used for commercial or industrial purposes that are:
Residential

Farming

| 68 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Funding impact statement

Differentials
The Council will differentiate the general rate based on use and area.
The differential categories include:

A.

Commercial or industrial properties means any
land that meets one or more of the following
criteria::
• All land used for any commercial or 		
industrial purposes.
• All land used by any government 			
department or agency or local body 		
agency.
• All vacant land within the Whanganui 		
District which is zoned for commercial or 		
industrial purposes.
• All land used for educational purposes not
otherwise exempted by legislation.
Commercial or industrial purposes’ includes
the sale of liquor, but excludes:
• A home occupation as defined by the 		
operative Whanganui District Plan; and
• Farming or horticulture.

B.

E.

Greater than or equal to 2 hectares but less than
3 hectares means – Any rating unit not included
in A above with a land area of 20,000 square
metres or more but less than 30,000 square
metres.

F.

Greater than or equal to 3 hectares but less than
4 hectares – Any rating unit not included in A
above with a land area of 30,000 square metres
or more but less than 40,000 square metres.

G.

Greater than or equal to 4 hectares but less than
5 hectares – Any rating unit not included in A
above with a land area of 40,000 square metres
or more but less than 50,000 square metres.

H.

Less than 0·5 hectares means – Any rating unit
not included in A above with a land area of less
than 5,000 square metres.

Greater than or equal to 5 hectares but less than
10 hectares – Any rating unit not included in A
above with a land area of 50,000 square metres
or more but less than 100,000 square metres.

C.

I.

Greater than or equal to 0.5 hectares but less
than 1 hectare means – Any rating unit not
included in A above with a land area of 5,000
square metres or more but less than 10,000
square metres.

Greater than or equal to 10 hectares – Any rating
unit not included in A above with a land area of
100,000 square metres or more.

Rating units that have more than one use (or
where there is doubt about the primary use)
will be placed in the category with the highest
differential factor. The Council may consider
rating such a property by apportioning the land
value between the separate uses and rate each
portion according to the appropriate category.
Note that, subject to rights of objection to the
rating information database set out in Section 29
of the Local Government (Rating) Act 2002, the
Council is the sole determiner of the categories.
Each activity funded by the General rate is
apportioned between the Residential, Farming
and Commercial categories as outlined in the
Allocation of activities to rating groups section.
The rates attributed to the Commercial category
are apportioned to commercial or industrial
properties on land value. Rate attribute to
the Residential category are apportioned to
properties less than 3 hectares. Rate attribute
to the Farming category are apportioned
to properties greater than 3 hectares. The
differential is calculated each year based on land
values in each differential category and ensures
7 even steps between a farm of greater than 10
hectares and a residential property of less than
0.5 hectares.

D.

Greater than or equal to 1 hectares but less
than 2 hectares means – Any rating unit not
included in A above with a land area of 10,000
square metres or more but less than 20,000
square metres.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 69 |

Funding impact statement

Roads and footpaths rate
– amount to be collected $9,137,404

Differentials

A differential targeted rate for roads and footpaths, set under section 16 of the Local Government
(Rating) Act 2002, on the capital value of each rating unit as follows:
Indicative cents in the dollar

Amount
collected

Residential

0.05893 cents per dollar of capital value on every rating
unit in the ‘Residential’ category.

$3,622,956

Farming

0.13508 cents per dollar of capital value on every rating
unit in the ‘Farming’ category.

$2,460,159

Commercial

0.20837 cents per dollar of capital value on every rating
unit in the ‘Commercial’ category.

$3,054,290

Residential
All rating units not included within the ‘Commercial’
category where the land area is less than 30,000
square metres.
Farming
All rating units not included within the ‘Commercial’
category where the land area is 30,000 square metres
or greater.
Commercial
• All land used for any commercial or industrial
purposes.
• All land used by any government department or
agency or local body agency.
• All vacant land within the Whanganui District which
is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes.
• All land used for educational purposes not
otherwise exempted by legislation.
‘Commercial or industrial purposes’ includes the sale
of liquor, but excludes:
•
•

Roading resilience rate
– amount to be collected $1,006,150
A differential targeted rate for the purpose of reducing debt for the roading activity set under section
16 of the Local Government (Rating) Act 2002, as a fixed amount per separately used or inhabited part
of a rating unit as follows:
Indicative rate
Residential

$45.00 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating unit in the
‘Residential’ category

Farming

$50.00 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating unit in the
‘Farming’ category

Commercial

$45.00 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating unit in the
‘Commercial’ category

The differential relationship between the categories is that Farming properties are assessed for $5.00
more per SUIP than Residential and Commercial properties.
| 70 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

A home occupation as defined by the operative
Whanganui District Plan; and
Farming or horticulture.

Differentials
Residential
All rating units not included within the ‘Commercial’
category where the land area is less than 30,000
square metres.
Farming
All rating units not included within the ‘Commercial’
category where the land area is 30,000 square metres
or greater.
Commercial
• All land used for any commercial or industrial
purposes.
• All land used by any government department or
agency or local body agency.
• All vacant land within the Whanganui District which
is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes.
• All land used for educational purposes not
otherwise exempted by legislation.
‘Commercial or industrial purposes’ includes the sale
of liquor, but excludes:
• A home occupation as defined by the operative
Whanganui District Plan; and
• Farming or horticulture.

Funding impact statement

Targeted rate on exotic forestry properties
- amount to be collected $155,250
A targeted rate for roading pavement renewals required to remediate roads used by vehicles
associated with exotic forestry plantations in the district, set under section 16 of the Local Government
(Rating) Act 2002, on the capital value of land used as exotic forestry plantations. The indicative
amount of the rate will be 0.18024 cents per dollar of capital value.

Earthquake strengthening and building replacement rate
– amount to be collected $1,065,569
A differential targeted rate for earthquake strengthening works on Council-owned buildings set under
section 16 of the Local Government (Rating) Act 2002, as a fixed amount per separately used or
inhabited part of a rating unit in the district as follows:

Indicative rate

Differentials
Residential
All rating units not included within the ‘Commercial’
category where the land area is less than 30,000
square metres.
Farming
All rating units not included within the ‘Commercial’
category where the land area is 30,000 square metres
or greater.
Commercial
•

Residential

$47.90 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating unit in the
‘Residential’ category

Farming

$47.90 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating unit in the
‘Farming’ category

Commercial

$48.90 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating unit in the
‘Commercial’ category

•
•

The differential relationship between the categories is that Commercial properties are assessed for
$1.00 more per SUIP than Residential and Farming properties.

•

All land used for any commercial or industrial
purposes.
All land used by any government department or
agency or local body agency.
All vacant land within the Whanganui District which
is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes.
All land used for educational purposes not
otherwise exempted by legislation.

‘Commercial or industrial purposes’ includes the sale
of liquor, but excludes:
•
•

A home occupation as defined by the operative
Whanganui District Plan; and
Farming or horticulture.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 71 |

Funding impact statement

Debt retirement rate
– amount to be collected $718,373

Differentials
Differentials are based on the following categories:

A differential targeted rate to retire debt attributable to the cost of the city stormwater disposal
system or other infrastructure system as decided by the Council set under section 16 of the Local
Government (Rating) Act 2002, on the basis of the capital value of each rating unit that has a
connection or for which connection is available. This charge will be set on a differential basis based
on the availability of the service. The categories are ‘connected’ and ‘serviceable’ and ‘other’. Rating
units in the ‘other’ category are charged a fixed amount per separately used or inhabited part of
a rating unit.
Indicative rate
Connected

Serviceable

Other

| 72 |

Differential
relationship

0.0117 cents in the dollar on capital value on every rating
unit in the ‘connected’ category.

1.0

0.0076 cents in the dollar on capital value on every rating
unit in the ‘serviceable’ category.

0.65 for 2021/22

TBA cents in the dollar on capital value on every rating
unit in the ‘serviceable’ category.
(Note: the actual cents in the dollar will be calculated
prior to rate setting for the 2022/23 year and will be 75%
of the connected amount).

0.75 from
2022/23 onward

$20.00 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating
unit that is in the ’other’ category.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Indicative amount
to be collected
$71,180

Connected
Any rating unit that is connected to the city
stormwater disposal system.
Serviceable
Any rating unit that is not connected but is practicably
able to be connected and within 30 metres of the city
stormwater disposal system, or located in Magnolia
Crescent, Simon Street or Morrell Street.
Other
Any rating unit not included in the ‘connected’ or
‘serviceable’ category.

Funding impact statement

City water supply – amount to be collected $6,486,050
including water by meter
A differential targeted rate for city water supply set under section 16 and 19 of the Local Government
(Rating) Act 2002, as follows:
Indicative rate

Differential ratio

Connected

$250.52 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating
unit that is connected to the city water system and is not
metered.

1.0

Serviceable

$125.26 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating
unit that is not connected, but is practicably able to be
connected to the city water system.

0.5

Metered supply

$250.52 for part of or the whole first 310 cubic metres
consumed or supplied, plus 80.81 cents per cubic metre
for every cubic metre over the first 310 cubic metres that
is consumed or supplied.

1.0 (plus per cubic
metre over 310m3)

Rural
extraordinary

$211.09 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating
unit supplied , plus 68.09 cents per cubic metre for every
cubic metre consumed or supplied in excess of the first
310 cubic metres.

0.8 (plus per
cubic metre over
310m3)

Differentials
Differentials are based on the following categories:
Connected
Any rating unit with an ordinary connection being a
connection equivalent to 20mm MDPE pipe to the city
water supply system.
Serviceable
Any rating unit within 100 metres of the city water
supply system but that does not have a connection to
the system.
Metered supply
Any rating unit that is not ‘rural extraordinary’ and that
has a connection greater than the equivalent of 20mm
MDPE pipe to the city water supply system.
Rural extraordinary
Any rating unit in the rural ward (excluding Mowhanau.
Putiki South, Fordell and airport water supplies) that is
connected to the city water supply system.

For the avoidance of doubt, the city water supply system includes the city, Mowhanau, Putiki South,
Fordell and Airport water supplies.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 73 |

Funding impact statement

City water firefighting
– amount to be collected $1,267,209
A targeted uniform rate for provision and maintenance of a water supply for firefighting on rating
units within the urban boundary per the operative District Plan, set under section 16 of the Local
Government (Rating) Act 2002, at an indicative rate of 0.01846 cents per dollar of capital value on
each rating unit.

Maxwell water supply
– amount to be collected $75,124 including water by meter
A differential targeted rate to meet the costs of the Maxwell water supply, set under sections 16 and 19
of the Local Government (Rating) Act 2002, as follows:

Indicative rate

Amount
collected

Residential

$345.00 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating
unit in the ‘residential’ category connected to the Maxwell
water system.

$18,630

Dairy

$69.00 per hectare on every rating unit in the ‘dairy’
category connected to the Maxwell water system.

$11,173

Rural

$15.24 per hectare on every rating unit within the ‘rural’
category connected to the Maxwell water system.

$16,572

Plus 63.25 cents per cubic metre of water supplied to every rating unit connected to the Maxwell
water supply system.

| 74 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Differentials
Differentials are based on the following categories:
Residential
Any rating unit primarily used as a residence.
Dairy
Any rating unit primarily used as a dairy farm.
Rural
Any rating unit that is not primarily a residence or
a dairy farm.

Funding impact statement

Westmere water supply – amount to be collected $168,432
including water by meter
A targeted rate, set under sections 16 and 19 of the Local Government (Rating) Act 2002, to meet the
cost of the Westmere water supply at an indicative rate of $250.52 for the first 310 cubic metres of
water supplied, plus 80.81 cents per cubic metre of water supplied in excess of 310 cubic metres to any
rating unit connected to the Westmere water system.

City wastewater
– amount to be collected $8,989,198

Differentials

A differential targeted rate for the operations, maintenance and development of the city wastewater
disposal system, set under section 16 of the Local Government (Rating) Act 2002, assessed on rating
units that are connected to the city wastewater disposal system, as follows:

Residential
All rating units where the land area is less than
30,000 square metres and the property is not used
commercially ...
Commercial means
•
•

Indicative rate

Differential ratio

Residential

$457.68 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating
unit that is in the ‘Residential’ category and is connected
to the city wastewater disposal system

1.0

Non-residential
single pan

$457.68 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating
unit that is in the ‘Non-residential single pan ’ category
and is connected to the city wastewater disposal system

1.0

Non-residential
multi pan

$228.84 per pan that is in the “ Non-residential multi
pan” category and is connected to the city wastewater
disposal system

0.5

•

All land used for any commercial or industrial
purposes.
All land used by any government department or
agency or local body agency.
All vacant land within the Whanganui District which
is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes.

Non-residential single pan
Any rating unit that is not residential and has a
single pan
Non-residential multi pans
Any rating unit that is not residential and has more
than one pan.

For the avoidance of doubt:
• The city wastewater system includes Marybank
• Rating units that are not connected to the city wastewater disposal system are not
assessed for this rate.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 75 |

Funding impact statement

Trade waste contributions to the city wastewater
treatment plant upgrade
– amount to be collected $781,819
A targeted rate set on a differential basis to meet the marginal costs of increasing the scale of the
upgraded city wastewater treatment plant to cater for large volume and load trade waste discharges,
set under section 16 of the Local Government (Rating) Act 2002. The rate is assessed on rating units
operated as businesses that discharge more than 100m3 of trade waste per day through the city
wastewater disposal system and predominantly located as follows:
Businesses discharging more
than 100m3 of trade waste per
day predominantly located at

Indicative amount of rate and
amount to be collected in the
2020/21 year

Indicative % of rate to be
collected in the 2020/21
year

57 Balgownie Ave, Whanganui

$336,841

43.084

325 Heads Road, Whanganui

$205,041

26.226

47 Bryce St, Whanganui

$90,053

11.518

241 Heads Rd, Whanganui

$116,237

14.868

49 Bryce St, Whanganui

$33,647

4.304

Total

$781,819

100

Trade waste fixed operating
costs – amount to be
collected $1,003,294
A targeted rate assessed on rating units
operated as businesses that discharge more
than 100m3 of trade waste per day through
the city wastewater disposal system to meet
the fixed operating costs of the conveyance,
treatment and disposal of large volume trade
waste discharges, set under section 16 of the
Local Government (Rating) Act 2002. The rate is
assessed as follows:
| 76 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Indicative rate
$34.848 per m3 average daily flow set via the discharge permit issued under Council’s Trade Waste
Bylaw 2018, plus
$16.874 per kg average daily Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) set via the discharge permit issued
under Council’s Trade Waste Bylaw 2018, plus
$60.148 per kg average daily Total Suspended Solids (TSS) set via the discharge permit issued
under Council’s Trade Waste Bylaw 2018.

Funding impact statement

Mowhanau wastewater
– amount to be collected $29,068
A differential targeted rate to meet the costs of the Mowhanau wastewater disposal system, set under
section 16 of the Local Government (Rating) Act 2002, as follows:
Indicative rate

Differential ratio

Connected

$390.18 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating
unit in the ‘connected’ category that is connected to the
Mowhanau wastewater disposal system.

1.0

Serviceable

$195.09 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating
unit in the ‘serviceable’ category that is not connected
but is practicably able to be connected to the Mowhanau
wastewater disposal system.

0.5

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 77 |

Funding impact statement

Stormwater disposal
– amount to be collected $5,948,460

Differentials
Differentials are based on the following categories:

A differential targeted rate to meet the costs of the city stormwater disposal system, set under section
16 of the Local Government (Rating) Act 2002, on the basis of the capital value of each rating unit that
has a connection or for which connection is available. This charge will be set on a differential basis
based on the availability of the service. The categories are ‘connected’, ‘serviceable’ and ’other’.

Connected

Serviceable

Indicative rate

Differential ratio

0.1074 cents in the dollar on capital value on every rating
unit in the ‘connected’ category.

1.0

0.0698 cents in the dollar on capital value on every rating
unit in the ‘serviceable’ category.

0.65 for 2021/22

TBA cents in the dollar on capital value on every rating
unit in the ‘serviceable’ category.

0.75 from
2022/23 onward

(Note: the actual cents in the dollar will be calculated
prior to rate setting for the 2022/23 year and will be 75%
of the connected amount).

Other

| 78 |

0.0537 cents in the dollar on capital value on every rating
unit in the ‘other’ category.

0.5 for 2021/22

TBA cents in the dollar on capital value on every rating
unit in the ‘other’ category.
(Note: the actual cents in the dollar will be calculated
prior to rate setting for the 2022/23 year and will be 75%
of the connected amount).

0.75 from
2022/23 onward

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Connected
Any rating unit that is connected to the city
stormwater disposal system.
Serviceable
Any rating unit that is not connected but is practicably
able to be connected and within 30 metres of the
city stormwater disposal system, excluding Magnolia
Crescent, Simon Street or Morrell Street.
Other
Any rating unit that is located in Magnolia Crescent,
Simon Street or Morrell Street.

Funding impact statement

Central Business District (CBD) services
– amount to be collected $518,979

Differentials
Council differentiates the CBD services rate based on
use and where the land is situated:

A differential targeted rate to meet the costs of CBD cleaning, maintenance and the Mainstreet
Whanganui promotional levy, set under section 16 of the Local Government (Rating) Act 2002, on all
commercial rating units in CBD A and CBD B as follows:
Indicative rate

Differential ratio

CBD A

0.4391 cents per dollar of capital value on every rating
unit that is in the ‘CBD A’ category.

1.0

CBD B

0.1756 cents per dollar of capital value on every rating
unit that is in the ‘CBD B’ category.

0.4

Plus $309.80 per separately used or inhabited part of a rating unit for every rating unit that is in the
‘CBD A’ or ‘CBD B’ category.

CBD A
The commercial properties in Victoria Avenue from
Taupo Quay to Ingestre Street, Guyton Street from St
Hill Street to Wicksteed Street, Maria Place from St
Hill Street to Watt Street, Ridgway Street from St Hill
Street to Drews Avenue.
CBD B
All commercial properties inside the area bounded
by St Hill Street, Ingestre Street, Wicksteed Street,
Watt Street, Drews Avenue, Taupo Quay, which are not
included as CBD A.
In all cases the street refers to the street
centre line.
Commercial:
• All land used for any commercial or industrial
purposes.
• All land used by any government department or
agency or local body agency.
• All vacant land within the Whanganui District which
is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes.
• All land used for educational purposes not
otherwise exempted by legislation.
‘Commercial or industrial purposes’ includes the sale
of liquor, but excludes:
• A home occupation as defined by the operative
Whanganui District Plan; and
• Farming or horticulture.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 79 |

Funding impact statement

Separate works rates

Discount

Targeted rates to finance the costs of capital development of the roading
network in the areas defined below, set under section 16 of the Local
Government (Rating) Act 2002.

A discount of 2.5% will be allowed on all net 2021/22 rates paid in full by the
due date of the first instalment for 2021/22.

Whangaehu Valley Road No 1
Whangaehu Valley Road No 2

Upper Whangaehu Road
Mangamahu Road and Creek Road

The following separate works rates will be assessed on the land value of each
rateable property in the appropriate area. Total revenue is quoted in each case.
Whangaehu
Valley Road No 1

to collect $11,837, an indicative rate of 0.02191
cents per dollar of land value.

Whangaehu
Valley Road No 2

to collect $9,558, an indicative rate of 0.01422
cents per dollar of land value.

Payment of metered water rates
Water meters are read on either a monthly or six monthly basis. The table
below outlines when payment for metered water is due, relative to the date
that the meter is read.

Reading Date

Due date

July 2021

20 August 2021

August 2021

20 September 2021

Currently Council collects special rates in the Whangaehu Valley Road
area. While Council itself does not contribute to the roading improvements
on these roads, Council does collect a special rate on behalf of the local
ratepayers for roading improvements that meet New Zealand Transport
Agency’s funding Net Present Value criteria.

September 2021

20 October 2021

October 2021

20 November 2021

November 2021

20 December 2021

Payment by instalment

December 2021

20 February 2022

Rates (except those for metered water and stormwater separation loans)
are payable in four equal instalments on the following due dates:

January 2022

20 February 2022

February 2022

20 March 2022

March 2022

20 April 2022

April 2022

20 May 2022

May 2022

20 June 2022

June 2022

20 August 2022

Instalment

Due date

Instalment 1

Wednesday, 25 August 2021

Instalment 2

Wednesday, 24 November 2021

Instalment 3

Wednesday, 23 February 2022

Instalment 4

Wednesday, 25 May 2022

| 80 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Funding impact statement

Additional charges (penalty)
For rates (excluding metered water), an additional charge of 5% will be
added to all instalments or part thereof remaining unpaid on the date that
is seven (7) days after the due date as follows:

An additional charge of 5% will be added to all metered water rates that
remain unpaid on the date that is seven (7) days after the due date as
follows:

Instalment

Date on which penalty will be added

Reading Date

Date on which penalty will be added

Instalment 1

Wednesday, 1 September 2021

July 2021

27 August 2021

Instalment 2

Wednesday, 1 December 2021

August 2021

27 September 2021

Instalment 3

Wednesday, 2 March 2022

September 2021

27 October 20120

Instalment 4

Wednesday, 1 June 2022

October 2021

27 November 2021

November 2021

27 December 2021

December 2021

27 February 2022

January 2022

27 February 2022

February 2022

27 March 2022

March 2022

27 April 2022

April 2022

27 May 2022

May 2022

27 June 2022

June 2022

27 August 2022

Additional charges of 5% will be added to rates assessed in any previous
financial year that remain unpaid on 20 July 2022. The penalty will be
added on 20 July 2022 and again on 20 January 2023 if the amount
remains unpaid.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 81 |

Funding impact statement

Funding impact statement
The table shows examples of rates for a range of residential, farming and Commercial properties.
This table is indicative only and the effect on individual properties will vary.

Property type

Previous
Land value

Previous
Capital
value

Land value

Capital
value

UAGC

General
Rate

Roading &
Footpaths

Roading
resilience

Exotic
Forestry

Earthquake
strengthening

Debt
retirement

City water
supply

City water
firefighting

City
Wastewater

Stormwater
disposal

"2021/22
total rates"

$ increase

% increase

"Residential
(Stormwater
serviceable)"

$105,000

$185,000

$105,000

$185,000

$700

$818

$109

$45

$0

$48

$14

$251

$34

$458

$129

$2,606

$181

7.5%

"Residential
(Stormwater
connected)"

$65,000

$245,000

$65,000

$245,000

$700

$506

$144

$45

$0

$48

$29

$251

$45

$458

$263

$2,489

$70

2.9%

"Residential
(Stormwater
connected)"

$123,000

$295,000

$123,000

$295,000

$700

$958

$174

$45

$0

$48

$35

$251

$54

$458

$317

$3,039

$155

5.4%

"Residential
(Stormwater
connected)"

$160,000

$340,000

$160,000

$340,000

$700

$1,247

$200

$45

$0

$48

$40

$251

$63

$458

$365

$3,416

$208

6.5%

"Residential
(Stormwater
connected)"

$160,000

$435,000

$160,000

$435,000

$700

$1,247

$256

$45

$0

$48

$51

$251

$80

$458

$467

$3,602

$197

5.8%

"Residential
(Stormwater
connected)"

$210,000

$610,000

$210,000

$610,000

$700

$1,636

$359

$45

$0

$48

$71

$251

$113

$458

$655

$4,336

$255

6.3%

Lifestyle

$335,000

$730,000

$335,000

$730,000

$700

$1,390

$986

$50

$0

$48

$20

$0

$0

$0

$0

$3,194

$245

8.3%

Farming

$920,000

$1,240,000

$920,000

$1,240,000

$700

$1,304

$1,675

$50

$0

$48

$20

$0

$0

$0

$0

$3,797

$146

4.0%

Farming

$2,250,000

$2,750,000

$2,250,000

$2,750,000

$700

$3,188

$3,715

$50

$0

$48

$20

$0

$0

$0

$0

$7,721

$362

4.9%

Farming

$3,320,000

$4,090,000

$3,320,000

$4,090,000

$700

$4,704

$5,525

$50

$0

$48

$20

$0

$0

$0

$0

$11,047

$533

5.1%

Exotic forestry

$335,000

$370,000

$335,000

$370,000

$700

$475

$500

$50

$667

$48

$20

$0

$0

$0

$0

$2,459

$54

2.3%

Exotic forestry

$1,370,000

$1,502,000

$1,370,000

$1,502,000

$700

$1,941

$2,029

$50

$2,707

$48

$20

$0

$0

$0

$0

$7,495

$221

3.0%

Commercial

$140,000

$380,000

$140,000

$380,000

$700

$1,817

$792

$45

$0

$49

$44

$251

$70

$458

$408

$4,633

$167

3.7%

Commercial

$385,000

$950,000

$385,000

$950,000

$1,400

$4,995

$1,980

$90

$0

$98

$111

$501

$175

$915

$1,020

$11,286

$474

4.4%

Commercial

$470,000

$2,190,000

$470,000

$2,190,000

$700

$6,098

$4,563

$45

$0

$49

$256

$251

$404

$1,144

$2,352

$15,863

$442

2.9%

| 82 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Funding impact statement

Funding impact statement
Whanganui District Council: Funding impact statement for 2021-2031 (whole of council)
Annual Plan
2020/21
$000

2021/22
$000

2022/23
$000

2023/24
$000

2024/25
$000

2025/26
$000

2026/27
$000

2027/28
$000

2028/29
$000

2029/30
$000

2030/31
$000

General rates, uniform annual general charges,
rates penalties

31,225

35,222

37,408

38,341

39,523

40,704

41,458

42,288

43,620

44,607

46,031

Targeted rates

32,741

32,506

33,157

34,389

35,822

37,489

38,765

40,042

40,573

41,590

43,177

Subsidies and grants for operating purposes

5,309

5,277

5,128

5,614

5,508

5,713

5,917

6,216

6,442

6,679

6,985

Fees and charges

9,305

8,081

8,537

9,111

9,416

9,672

9,979

10,329

10,726

11,127

11,474

Interest and dividends from investments

1,205

690

690

1,190

1,190

1,190

1,190

1,190

1,190

1,190

1,190

Local authorities fuel tax, fines, infringement fees
and other receipts

2,485

2,437

2,608

2,633

2,754

2,897

2,910

3,001

3,214

3,234

3,352

82,270

84,213

87,528

91,278

94,213

97,665

100,219

103,066

105,765

108,427

112,209

Payments to staff and suppliers

59,882

62,533

65,664

67,461

68,842

71,337

72,725

74,993

77,954

79,592

82,433

Finance costs

5,705

4,903

4,661

4,991

5,091

5,042

4,849

4,630

4,429

4,363

4,463

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Total application of operating funding (B)

65,587

67,436

70,325

72,452

73,933

76,379

77,574

79,623

82,383

83,955

86,896

Surplus (deficit) of operating funding (A - B)

16,683

16,777

17,203

18,826

20,280

21,286

22,645

23,443

23,382

24,472

25,313

24,231

20,436

6,900

6,391

6,552

5,524

5,670

5,971

6,141

21,079

21,764

189

1,248

1,003

1,014

1,144

857

717

623

835

857

681

(2,159)

(206)

13,620

4,589

(103)

(4,596)

(8,801)

(6,324)

(7,669)

1,677

2,402

Gross proceeds from asset sales

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Lump sum contributions

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Other dedicated capital funding

29

29

29

29

29

29

29

29

29

29

29

22,290

21,507

21,552

12,023

7,622

1,814

(2,385)

299

(664)

23,642

24,876

Sources of operating funding

Total operating funding (A)
Application of operating funding

Other operating funding applications

Sources of capital funding
Subsidies and grants for capital expenditure
Development and financial contributions
Increase (decrease) in debt

Total sources of capital funding (C)
Application of capital funding
Capital expenditure
-to meet additional demand

900

2,950

3,246

5,153

2,877

1,657

1,789

1,240

40

34

0

-to improve the level of service

22,841

21,424

11,944

11,314

10,472

6,510

5,099

5,282

6,950

7,578

7,667

-to replace existing assets

15,112

13,860

23,515

14,332

14,503

14,883

13,322

17,170

15,678

40,452

42,472

120

50

50

50

50

50

50

50

50

50

50

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Total application of capital funding (D)

38,973

38,284

38,755

30,849

27,902

23,100

20,260

23,742

22,718

48,114

50,189

Surplus (deficit) of capital funding (C - D)

(16,683)

(16,777)

(17,203)

(18,826)

(20,280)

(21,286)

(22,645)

(23,443)

(23,382)

(24,472)

(25,313)

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Increase (decrease) in reserves
Increase (decrease) of investments

FUNDING BALANCE ((A - B) + (C - D))

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 83 |

Prospective statement of comprehensive
revenue and expense

Prospective statement of comprehensive revenue and expense
Annual Plan
2020/21
$000

2021/22
$000

2022/23
$000

2023/24
$000

2024/25
$000

2025/26
$000

2026/27
$000

2027/28
$000

2028/29
$000

2029/30
$000

2030/31
$000

60,959

64,730

67,568

69,731

72,348

75,194

77,227

79,333

81,196

83,199

86,209

Rates revenue
Rates - excluding metered water, trade waste and
penalties
Rates - metered water, trade waste and penalties

3,008

2,998

2,998

2,998

2,998

2,998

2,998

2,998

2,998

2,998

2,998

Total Rates

63,967

67,728

70,566

72,729

75,346

78,192

80,225

82,331

84,194

86,197

89,207

10,539

10,613

9,877

11,526

10,884

11,238

11,587

12,186

12,582

27,758

28,749

189

1,248

1,003

1,014

1,144

857

717

623

835

857

682

9,305

8,081

8,536

9,111

9,416

9,672

9,978

10,328

10,726

11,127

11,474
1,190

Non rate revenue
Subsidies and grants
Development and financial contributions
Fees and charges
Interest and dividends from investments

1,205

690

690

1,190

1,190

1,190

1,190

1,190

1,190

1,190

Other dedicated capital funding

19,029

15,129

2,179

509

1,204

29

29

29

29

29

29

Other revenue

3,039

2,795

2,900

2,891

3,019

3,179

3,189

3,299

3,531

3,559

3,674

Total non rate revenue

43,306

38,556

25,185

26,241

26,857

26,165

26,690

27,655

28,893

44,520

45,798

Total revenue

107,273

106,284

95,751

98,970

102,203

104,357

106,915

109,986

113,087

130,717

135,005

Personnel costs

18,515

19,878

20,752

21,499

21,803

22,370

22,929

23,525

24,160

24,813

25,458

Finance costs

5,705

4,903

4,661

4,991

5,092

5,042

4,850

4,630

4,430

4,363

4,464

Depreciation and amortisation expense

22,537

22,363

22,967

24,901

26,534

26,575

28,203

28,365

28,350

30,083

31,177

Other expenses

41,367

42,655

44,912

45,961

47,039

48,967

49,796

51,468

53,793

54,779

56,975

Total expenditure

88,124

89,799

93,292

97,352

100,468

102,954

105,778

107,988

110,733

114,038

118,074

Surplus/(deficit)

19,149

16,485

2,459

1,618

1,735

1,403

1,137

1,998

2,354

16,679

16,931

19,149

16,485

2,459

1,618

1,735

1,403

1,137

1,998

2,354

16,679

16,931

0

Expenditure

Surplus/(deficit) attributable to:
Whanganui District Council
Other comprehensive revenue and expense
Gain on infrastructure revaluations

0

0

42,137

0

0

62,209

0

0

71,395

0

Gain on property revaluations

7,184

0

0

12,992

0

0

10,633

0

0

10,772

0

Total other comprehensive revenue and expense

7,184

0

42,137

12,992

0

62,209

10,633

0

71,395

10,772

0

26,333

16,485

44,596

14,610

1,735

63,612

11,770

1,998

73,749

27,451

16,931

16,485

44,596

14,610

1,735

63,612

11,770

1,998

73,749

27,451

16,931

Total comprehensive revenue and expense

Total comprehensive revenue and expense attributable to:
Whanganui District Council

| 84 |

26,333

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Prospective statement of financial position

Prospective statement of financial position
Annual Plan
2020/21
$000

2021/22
$000

2022/23
$000

2023/24
$000

2024/25
$000

2025/26
$000

2026/27
$000

2027/28
$000

2028/29
$000

2029/30
$000

2030/31
$000

Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents

3,342

6,734

6,903

7,058

7,216

7,382

7,545

7,716

7,895

8,078

8,259

Receivables

7,452

8,020

8,252

8,459

8,671

8,895

9,118

9,356

9,608

9,867

10,124

10,794

14,754

15,155

15,517

15,887

16,277

16,663

17,072

17,503

17,945

18,383

60,380

Total current assets
Non-current assets
Investment in CCOs and other similar entities

10,195

60,380

60,380

60,380

60,380

60,380

60,380

60,380

60,380

60,380

Investment in other entities

-

722

722

722

722

722

722

722

722

722

722

Total other financial assets

10,195

61,102

61,102

61,102

61,102

61,102

61,102

61,102

61,102

61,102

61,102

1,020,660

1,021,798

1,079,696

1,098,601

1,099,936

1,158,629

1,161,275

1,156,607

1,222,323

1,251,078

1,270,041

1,165

1,510

1,486

1,470

1,454

1,444

1,437

1,432

1,429

1,427

1,425

25,640

10,063

10,355

10,614

10,878

11,161

11,440

11,737

12,054

12,379

12,701

Total non-current assets

1,057,660

1,094,473

1,152,639

1,171,787

1,173,370

1,232,336

1,235,254

1,230,878

1,296,908

1,325,986

1,345,269

Total assets

1,068,454

1,109,227

1,167,794

1,187,304

1,189,257

1,248,613

1,251,918

1,247,950

1,314,411

1,343,931

1,363,652

Property, plant and equipment
Intangible assets
Investment property

Liabilities
Current liabilities
Payables

9,994

10,407

10,693

10,949

11,210

11,487

11,763

12,056

12,367

12,688

13,005

Borrowings

9,000

14,000

14,000

14,000

14,000

14,000

14,000

14,000

14,000

14,000

14,000

Employee entitlements

1,331

2,312

2,372

2,424

2,479

2,537

2,594

2,655

2,720

2,787

2,853

Total current liabilities

20,325

26,719

27,065

27,373

27,689

28,024

28,357

28,711

29,087

29,475

29,858

113,469

107,041

120,662

125,250

125,148

120,551

111,750

105,426

97,757

99,433

101,835

-

50

50

50

50

50

50

50

50

50

50

11,417

12,808

12,808

12,808

12,808

12,808

12,808

12,808

12,808

12,808

12,808

Non-current liabilities
Borrowings
Deferred tax liability
Derivative financial instruments
Employee entitlements

123

150

154

159

162

167

171

175

180

185

190

Total non-current liabilities

125,009

120,049

133,674

138,267

138,168

133,576

124,779

118,459

110,795

112,476

114,883

Total liabilities

145,334

146,768

160,739

165,640

165,857

161,600

153,136

147,170

139,882

141,951

144,741

Net assets (assets minus liabilities)

923,121

962,459

1,007,055

1,021,665

1,023,400

1,087,012

1,098,782

1,100,780

1,174,529

1,201,980

1,218,911

Accumulated funds

561,749

607,802

610,211

611,780

613,465

614,818

615,906

617,854

620,158

636,787

653,667

Revaluation reserves

296,522

302,188

344,325

357,316

357,316

419,525

430,157

430,157

501,552

512,324

512,325

Restricted reserves

63,816

51,271

51,321

51,371

51,421

51,471

51,521

51,571

51,621

51,671

51,721

Other reserves

1,034

1,198

1,198

1,198

1,198

1,198

1,198

1,198

1,198

1,198

1,198

Total equity

923,121

962,459

1,007,055

1,021,665

1,023,400

1,087,012

1,098,782

1,100,780

1,174,529

1,201,980

1,218,911

Equity

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 85 |

Prospective cash flow statement

Prospective cash flow statement
Annual Plan
2020/21
$000

2021/22
$000

2022/23
$000

2023/24
$000

2024/25
$000

2025/26
$000

2026/27
$000

2027/28
$000

2028/29
$000

Receipts from rates revenue

63,967

67,728

70,566

72,728

75,345

78,192

80,224

82,330

Subsidies and grants

10,539

10,613

9,877

11,526

10,885

11,238

11,588

12,187

Interest received

200

185

185

185

185

185

185

Dividends received

1,005

505

505

1,005

1,005

1,005

1,005

Other dedicated capital funding

19,028

15,129

2,179

509

1,204

29

29

29

29

29

29

Receipts from other revenue

11,979

11,765

11,930

12,565

13,116

13,214

13,397

13,731

14,538

14,975

15,268

Payments to suppliers

(41,367)

(42,655)

(44,575)

(45,663)

(46,733)

(48,640)

(49,474)

(51,125)

(53,427)

(54,403)

(56,603)

Payments to employees

(18,515)

(19,878)

(20,752)

(21,499)

(21,803)

(22,370)

(22,929)

(23,525)

(24,160)

(24,813)

(25,458)

Interest paid

(5,705)

(4,903)

(4,661)

(4,991)

(5,091)

(5,042)

(4,850)

(4,630)

(4,430)

(4,363)

(4,463)

41,131

38,489

25,254

26,365

28,113

27,811

29,175

30,187

30,516

46,570

47,918

(38,802)

(38,183)

(38,655)

(30,749)

(27,802)

(22,999)

(20,161)

(23,642)

(22,618)

(48,014)

(50,089)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

Receipts from sale of property, plant and
equipment

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Receipts for sale and maturity of investments

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

(38,852)

(38,233)

(38,705)

(30,799)

(27,852)

(23,049)

(20,211)

(23,692)

(22,668)

(48,064)

(50,139)

2029/30
$000

2030/31
$000

84,193

86,197

89,206

12,583

27,758

28,749

185

185

185

185

1,005

1,005

1,005

1,005

Cash flows from operating activities

Net cash flow from operating activities
Cash flows from investing activities
Purchase of property, plant and equipment
Purchase of intangible assets

Net cash flow from investing activities
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from borrowing

6,157

9,613

23,881

15,354

10,933

7,267

3,494

5,092

3,919

13,827

14,398

Repayment of borrowing

(8,316)

(9,819)

(10,261)

(10,765)

(11,036)

(11,863)

(12,295)

(11,416)

(11,588)

(12,150)

(11,996)

Net cash flow from financing activities

(2,159)

(206)

13,620

4,589

(103)

(4,596)

(8,801)

(6,324)

(7,669)

1,677

2,402

120

50

169

155

158

166

163

171

179

183

181

Cash, cash equivalents, and bank overdrafts at
the beginning of the year

3,222

6,684

6,734

6,903

7,058

7,216

7,382

7,545

7,716

7,895

8,078

Cash, cash equivalents, and bank overdrafts at
the end of the year

3,342

6,734

6,903

7,058

7,216

7,382

7,545

7,716

7,895

8,078

8,259

Net (decrease)/increase in cash, cash equivalents,
and bank overdrafts

| 86 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Prospective statement of changes in net assets/equity

Prospective statement of changes in net assets/equity
Annual Plan
2020/21
$000

2021/22
$000

2022/23
$000

2023/24
$000

2024/25
$000

2025/26
$000

2026/27
$000

2027/28
$000

2028/29
$000

2029/30
$000

2030/31
$000

896,788

945,974

962,459

1,007,055

1,021,665

1,023,400

1,087,012

1,098,782

1,100,780

1,174,529

1,201,980

Total comprehensive revenue and expense for
the year

26,333

16,485

44,596

14,610

1,735

63,612

11,770

1,998

73,749

27,451

16,931

Balance at 30 June

923,121

962,459

1,007,055

1,021,665

1,023,400

1,087,012

1,098,782

1,100,780

1,174,529

1,201,980

1,218,911

637,984

Balance at 1 July

Represented by:
Retained earnings
Balance at 1 July

543,754

564,875

609,000

611,409

612,977

614,662

616,015

617,103

619,051

621,355

Transfers (to)/from restricted reserves

(120)

27,640

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

(50)

Surplus/(deficit) for the year

19,149

16,485

2,459

1,618

1,735

1,403

1,138

1,998

2,354

16,679

16,931

562,783

609,000

611,409

612,977

614,662

616,015

617,103

619,051

621,355

637,984

654,865

63,696

78,911

51,271

51,321

51,371

51,421

51,471

51,521

51,571

51,621

51,671

120

(27,640)

50

50

50

50

50

50

50

50

50

63,816

51,271

51,321

51,371

51,421

51,471

51,521

51,571

51,621

51,671

51,721

289,338

302,188

302,188

344,325

357,317

357,317

419,526

430,158

430,158

501,553

512,325

7,184

-

42,137

12,992

-

62,209

10,632

-

71,395

10,772

-

Balance at 30 June

296,522

302,188

344,325

357,317

357,317

419,526

430,158

430,158

501,553

512,325

512,325

Total equity

923,121

962,459

1,007,055

1,021,665

1,023,400

1,087,012

1,098,782

1,100,780

1,174,529

1,201,980

1,218,911

Balance at 30 June
Restricted reserves
Balance at 1 July
Transfers (to)/from retained earnings
Balance at 30 June
Asset revaluation reserves
Balance at 1 July
Revaluation gains/(losses)

Note: Closing equity as per the 2020/21 Annual Plan and opening equity for 2021/22 differ due to the timing of these
relative forecasts and the impact of actual revaluation and financial movements that and financial movements that have
occurred during 2019/20 and the financial year to date.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 87 |

Prospective statement of reserve funds

Prospective statement of reserve funds
Restricted Reserves consists of:

Reserve

Activities to which the
reserve relates

Self funding insurance
City Endowment

All activities
Investments

Harbour Endowment

Investments

Henry Sarjeant Bequest
Hutton Estate
Robertson Art Prize Fund
Gallery Redevelopment project
Grave maintenance bequests
Waste minimisation levy
CBD parking fund
Heritage Building Preservation fund
De-sexing program
MA Larsen Bequest
T Waight Park fund
Fairbridge Bequest
Dovey Gazebo fund
Birch Reserve Fund

Community & cultural
Community & cultural
Community & cultural
Community & cultural
Community facilities and services
Community facilities and services
Community facilities and services
Community facilities and services
Community facilities and services
Parks and recreation
Parks and recreation
Parks and recreation
Parks and recreation
Parks and recreation

Kai Iwi Trust
J McLean Bequest
Handley Park fund
Nagaizumi Donation
Nicholson bequest
Tree Planting contribution
Crown and other trusts' properties
Rural road special rate - Whangaehu No 1
Rural road special rate - Whangaehu No 2
CUVL renewals fund

Parks and recreation
Parks and recreation
Parks and recreation
Parks and recreation
Parks and recreation
Parks and recreation
Parks and recreation
Roads, footpaths and pathways
Roads, footpaths and pathways
Economic development

International Education
The Waitotara Centennial Fund
Aged Citizens Benefit Trust
Tram Fund
Welcoming Communities grant
Community Development grants
Tylee Cottage
Opera House Friends
Library mobile vans
LI Smith Bequest

Economic development
Corporate
Corporate
Community & cultural
Community & cultural
Community & cultural
Community & cultural
Community & cultural
Community & cultural
Community & cultural

| 88 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Purpose of the reserve
To set aside funds to cover insurance excesses
To provide alternative income for funding of Council
activities
To provide funds for operation and maintenance of
the Port
To fund the purchase of artworks
To fund Sarjeant Gallery expenditure
To fund art competitions and grants
Lotteries Board funds to go towards Gallery project
Maintenance of specific grave sites
To fund waste minimisations services
To fund CBD parking infrastructure
To fund future IEP grants
To fund future dog de-sexing program
To finance improvements at the Bason Reserve
For improvements at Thomas Waight Park
For upgrading work at the Winter Gardens
For Bason Reserve maintenance
To provide funds for maintenance of parks and
reserves
Council is trustee for Maori land at Kai Iwi
Reserve created on historic bequest
To fund improvements at Handley Park
For qualifying expenditure
For qualifying expenditure
For qualifying expenditure
Properties adminstered on behalf of third parties
Rural rates specifically collected for future works
Rural rates specifically collected for future works
To fund renewals of community under-veranda
lighting
To fund education initiatives
To fund Outward Bound trips for approved people
To benefit aged citizens
To fund the Tram project
To administer the Welcoming Communities scheme
To fund Youth Committee projects
To fund the Artists in Residence scheme
To fund future Friends projects
To fund purchase of new mobile vans
To fund an arts award

Balance at
1 July 2021
$000
2,299
26,170

Deposits
2021-2031
$000
22
256

Withdrawls
2021-2031
$000
0
0

Balance at
30 June 2031
$000
2,321
26,426

27,690

0

(27,690)

0

698
4
12
12,472
20
386
753
67
1
602
30
11
9
108

7
0
0
122
0
4
7
1
0
6
0
0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

705
4
12
12,594
20
390
760
68
1
608
30
11
9
109

24
12
6
10
42
4
6,781
65
96
190

0
0
0
0
0
0
67
1
1
2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

24
12
6
10
42
4
6,848
66
97
192

77
39
6
11
61
10
48
0
21
76

1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

78
39
6
11
62
10
48
0
21
77

78,911

500

(27,690)

51,721

Notes to the financial statements

Notes to the financial statements
Note 1 - Reconciliation of Prospective statement of comprehensive revenue and expense to the Funding impact statement (FIS)		
The Funding impact statements are prepared in accordance to with the Local Government (Financial Reporting
and Prudence) Regulations 2014. They do not comply with Generally accepted accounting practices (GAAP).
However, the Statement of comprehensive revenue and expense is prepared in compliance with GAAP.
The following is a reconciliation between the revenue and expense shown on the statement of comprehensive
revenue and expense and the funding impact statement for the whole of Council.		

Annual Plan
2020/21
$000

2021/22
$000

2022/23
$000

2023/24
$000

2024/25
$000

2025/26
$000

2026/27
$000

2027/28
$000

2028/29
$000

2029/30
$000

2030/31
$000

Operating funding in the FIS
Subsidies and grants for capital expenditure
Development and financial contributions
Other dedicated capital funding
Net gain and losses not included in the FIS

82,270
24,231
189
29
554

84,213
20,436
1,248
29
359

87,528
6,900
1,003
29
292

91,278
6,391
1,014
29
259

94,213
6,552
1,144
29
265

97,665
5,524
857
29
283

100,219
5,670
717
29
279

103,066
5,971
623
29
297

105,765
6,141
835
29
317

108,427
21,079
857
29
325

112,209
21,764
681
29
322

Total Revenue in the Statement of
Comprehensive revenue and expense

107,273

106,284

95,751

98,970

102,203

104,357

106,915

109,986

113,087

130,717

135,005

Application of operating funding in the FIS
Depreciation not included in the FIS

65,587
22,537

67,436
22,363

70,325
22,967

72,452
24,901

73,933
26,534

76,379
26,575

77,574
28,203

79,623
28,365

82,383
28,350

83,955
30,083

86,896
31,177

Total expenditure in the statement of revenue
and expense

88,124

89,799

93,292

97,352

100,468

102,954

105,778

107,988

110,733

114,038

118,074

1,446

1,446

1,446

1,446

1,446

1,446

1,446

1,446

1,446

1,446

1,446

1,340
703
820
14
115
1,140
10,078
1,921
301

1,862
680
764
11
111
1,181
10,069
1,966
302

2,219
660
925
9
108
1,255
10,730
2,130
365

3,402
710
918
8
121
1,412
10,839
2,175
373

3,394
672
892
13
128
1,437
10,798
2,220
362

3,304
644
900
10
124
1,461
11,723
2,438
358

3,369
672
881
9
137
1,532
11,635
2,469
363

3,252
658
956
8
132
1,488
11,541
2,507
392

3,147
652
938
6
129
1,475
12,477
2,766
416

3,289
669
958
12
136
1,561
13,178
2,796
459

3,860

3,905

4,203

4,227

4,261

4,630

4,660

4,710

5,115

5,122

2,071

2,116

2,296

2,349

2,398

2,609

2,638

2,707

2,962

2,997

22,363

22,967

24,901

26,534

26,575

28,203

28,365

28,350

30,083

31,177

2021
21,150

2022
21,285

2023
21,420

2024
21,555

Year (as at 30 June)
2025
2026
21,690
21,825

2027
21,960

2028
22,095

2029
22,230

2030
22,365

Note 2 - Targeted rates for metered water supply
Targeted rates for metered water supply

Note 3 - Depreciation and amortisation by group of activities
Community and cultural
1,188
Community facilities and services
475
Corporate
498
Economic development
1
Investments
78
Parks and recreation
653
Provision of roads and footpaths
9,722
Stormwater drainage
2,225
Transportation
219
Sewerage and the treatment and disposal of
5,153
sewage
Water supply
2,326
Depreciation and amortisation expense

22,537

Note 4 - Rating base information (as at 30 June)
Projected number of rating units within the district

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 89 |

Long-Term Plan disclosure statement for the period
commencing 1 July 2021

Long-Term Plan disclosure statement for
the period commencing 1 July 2021
What is the purpose of this statement?

Rates affordability benchmark

The purpose of this statement is to disclose the council’s planned financial
performance in relation to various benchmarks to enable the assessment of
whether the council is prudently managing its revenues, expenses, assets,
liabilities, and general financial dealings.

The council meets the rates affordability benchmark if its planned rates
increases (excluding metered water, trade waste and penalties) equal or are
less than each quantified limit on rates increases.

The Council is required to include this statement in its Long-Term Plan
in accordance with the Local Government (Financial Reporting and
Prudence) Regulations 2014 (the regulations). Refer to the regulations for
more information, including definitions of some of the terms used in this
statement.

Rates (increases) affordability
The following graph compares the council’s planned rates increases with
a quantified limit on rates increases contained in the financial strategy
included in this Long-Term Plan. The quantified limit is:
• Rates increases (excluding water by meter, trade waste targeted rates
and penalties) no more than the Local Government inflation rate plus 2%
(after accounting for growth)

5%

4%
3%
2%

Quantified limit on rates increases
Proposed rates increases (at or within limit)
Proposed rates increase exceeds limit

| 90 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

2030/31

2029/30

2028/29

2027/28

2026/27

2025/26

2024/25

2021/22

0%

2023/24

1%

2022/23

Rates increase percentage

6%

Long-Term Plan disclosure statement for the period
commencing 1 July 2021

Debt affordability benchmark

Balanced budget benchmark

The council meets the debt affordability benchmark if its planned
borrowing is within each quantified limit on borrowing.

The following graph displays the Council’s planned revenue (excluding
development contributions, financial contributions, vested assets, gains
on derivative financial instruments, and revaluations of property, plant,
or equipment) as a proportion of planned operating expenses (excluding
losses on derivative financial instruments and revaluations of property,
plant, or equipment).

The following graph compares the council’s planned debt with a quantified
limit on borrowing contained in the financial strategy included in this
long-term plan. The quantified limit is:
Net borrowing less than 200% of total revenue (net borrowing is
defined as total debt less cash or near cash financial investments,
total revenue excludes development contributions and non-cash
items)

The council meets the balanced budget benchmark if its planned revenue
equals or is greater than its planned operating expenses.

125%

Quantified limit on debt

114%

113%

2029/30

2030/31

100%

101%

2027/28

100%

100% 100%

2026/27

100%

105%

2024/25

101%

110%

101%

95%

Benchmark not met

2028/29

2025/26

90%
85%

2030/31

2029/30

2028/29

2027/28

2026/27

2025/26

2024/25

2022/23

0%

2023/24

50%

115%

2023/24

100%

117%

2022/23

150%

121%

2021/22

200%

120%

2020/21

Revenue / expenditure (%)

250%

2021/22

Net debt as a percentage of revenue

•

Benchmark met

Proposed debt (at or within limit)
Proposed debt (exceeds limit)

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 91 |

Long-Term Plan disclosure statement for the period
commencing 1 July 2021

Essential services benchmark
The following graph displays the council’s planned capital expenditure on
network services as a proportion of expected depreciation on network services.
The council meets the essential services benchmark if its planned capital
expenditure on network services equals or is greater than expected
depreciation on network services.

181%

180%

140%
120%

99%

103%

111%
97%

100%
80%

89%

80%

89%

80%

60%
40%

Benchmark met

Benchmark not met

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

2030/31

2029/30

2028/29

2027/28

2026/27

2025/26

2022/23

2021/22

2024/25

20%
2020/21

• The nature of capital expenditure means that in some years we have
large projects which increase depreciation in future years.
• We have adopted a risk-based approach to assent management,
meaning that we have prioritised capital expenditure towards critical
assets, non-critical assets will be run to failure, and then replaced/
renewed. Over a number of years we have been gathering reliable
data on the condition of our critical assets to ensure money is spent
prudently, and in the area of most need.
• Our Roading asset management are prepared in full compliance 		
with the criteria outlined by the New Zealand Transport Agency 		
(NZTA), these plans are audited by NZTA who funds 60% of our 		
Roading expenditure.
Our planned capital expenditure on network services is based on asset
information, criticality and condition. Although we do not meet the
requirements of this benchmark, we believe that our capital expenditure is
set at a sustainable and prudent level.

76%

0%

| 92 |

182%

160%

2023/24

Capital expenditure / depreciation

200%

Council does not meet the essential services benchmark for 2020/21,
2021/22 and 2024/25 through to 2028/29. There are a number of factors
that contribute towards capital expenditure being less than depreciation for
this Long-Term Plan including:

Long-Term Plan disclosure statement for the period
commencing 1 July 2021

Debt servicing benchmark
The following graph displays the Council’s planned borrowing costs as
a proportion of planned revenue (excluding development contributions,
financial contributions, vested assets, gains on derivative financial
instruments, and revaluations of property, plant, or equipment).
Whanganui District Council is not a high-growth local authority and
therefore, it meets the debt servicing benchmark if it’s planned borrowing
costs equal or are less than 10% of its revenue.

10%
8%
6%

5.4%

5.1%
4.7% 4.9%

5.1%

4.9%

4.6%

4%

4.2% 4.0%

3.4% 3.3%

Benchmark met

2030/31

2029/30

2028/29

2027/28

2026/27

2025/26

2024/25

2023/24

2021/22

0%

2022/23

2%

2020/21

Revenue / expenditure (%)

12%

Benchmark not met

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 93 |

Revenue and financing policy

Revenue and financing policy
Introduction
The Revenue and Financing Policy (RFP) outlines
the Council’s policies on the funding sources
to be used to fund the operational and capital
expenditure of Council’s activities and the
rationale for their use.
It is an important instrument of Council’s
financial management because how the activities
are funded can have a significant impact on the
financial viability of council services as well as
on the overall impact of any allocation of liability
for revenue needs on the community.
The Revenue and Financing Policy is required by
section 102 of the Local Government Act 2002
(LGA). The policy requirements are included in
sections 101 and 103 of the LGA.
The Revenue and Financing Policy identifies the
sources of funding the Council has decided upon
for its activities. In addition to identifying the
sources of funding, the RFP must outline why
the Council has determined that they should
be used. A two-step process is required under
section 101(3) of the LGA.
Step one involves determining the appropriate
funding sources for each activity. In doing so,
Council must consider the following under
section 101(3)(a) of the LGA:
• The community outcomes to which the
activity primarily contributes (why the service
is provided) and how funding might promote
the achievement of these outcomes.
• The distribution of benefits between the
community as a whole, any identifiable part
of the community, and individuals (user/
beneficiary pays principle). Those who benefit
| 94 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

from a service or facility should be considered
in determining who pays for it.

act as a barrier to the accessibility of the
activity?

• The period in or over which those benefits are
expected to occur (intergenerational equity
principle). The benefits of some activities
will occur over the entire life of an asset. This
may benefit not only current generations but
future generations who should also contribute
toward the cost.

• Is the proposed funding approach legally
compliant e.g. does it meet restrictions on the
level of fixed rates able to be charged?

• The extent to which the actions or inaction of
particular individuals or a group contribute
to the need to undertake the activity
(exacerbator pays principle). Those who cause
the need for an activity should contribute to
the cost of that activity.
• The costs and benefits, including
consequences for transparency and
accountability, of funding the activity
distinctly from other activities. For
example, the benefits of transparency and
accountability may be outweighed by the
cost of establishing systems to support cost
recovery for small activities.
All of these matters must be considered, with
no single criterion given a greater weight than
the others. Council must use its judgement and
balance often competing principles.
In step two, Council must consider the overall
impact of this allocation of liability for revenue
needs on the community under section 101(3)
(b) of the LGA. Changes may be required where
there are particularly negative effects. Matters
the Council may consider could include:
• Does the overall outcome support the
strategic direction of the Council?
• Does the funding approach support the
community outcomes desired? Will the policy

• Does the proposed funding approach take
account of affordability issues e.g. the likely
impact on ratepayers on fixed incomes?
• What incentives will the policy have for
development of the district?
• How is the burden of funding distributed
across differing sectors of the community?
• What are the size and materiality of any
shifts in funding, and how do these affect the
community?
• Is the mix of funding sources sustainable in
the long term?
• Is the mix of funding sources fair and
equitable?

Funding mechanisms
The sources of funding available to Council
are as follows:
Rates – there are three main types of rates:
• General rates
• Uniform annual general charge (UAGC)
• Targeted rates
Rates are governed by the Local Government
(Rating) Act 2002 (LGRA).
General rates are used to fund activities where
Council believes there is benefit to the whole of
the community across the district. The majority
of Council’s activities are funded by general
rates.

Revenue and financing policy

General rates must be based on a property
valuation system (land value, capital value or
annual value) and assessed across all rateable
properties in the district.
Council has reviewed its choice of valuation
system and has determined to continue to use
land value for the general rate.
Council uses differentials to alter the incidence
of the land value based general rates. The
differentials mitigate the effects of a valuationbased rate which would otherwise place an unfair
burden on higher value properties, to ensure a
fair and equitable proportion of the rates are
paid by the various differential categories.
Setting a differential rate does not increase
the rating income, it merely allocates the rates
requirement in a different way from a pure valuebased system.
For each differential category Council sets a rate
per dollar of rateable land value.
Definitions of the differential categories and the
rate per dollar of land value for each category
are included in the Funding Impact Statement.
Uniform annual general charge (UAGC) is a
fixed charge set per separately used or inhabited
part of a rating unit (SUIP). The UAGC ensures
all ratepayers make a minimum contribution to
Council’s costs for the services Council provides.
It ensures that higher value properties do not
carry a disproportionate amount of the cost
burden. The UAGC, like the general rate, funds
services that benefit the whole of the community
across the district.
Council sets the UAGC each year during its
Annual or Long-Term Plan deliberations, giving
consideration to the factors outlined above in
step two of the process (section 101(3)(b) of the
LGA) and the 30% cap on rates set on a uniform
basis (excluding water and wastewater).

Targeted rates can be set in relation to all
rateable land within the district, or one or more
categories of rateable land outlined in Schedule
2 of the LGRA (e.g. the use to which the land is
put, the area of land within the rating unit, where
the land is situated). Targeted rates can be set
on a uniform basis or differentially for different
categories of rateable land.
Council uses targeted rates for activities where
the benefits are clearly received by a specific
group of ratepayers, where the activity warrants
separate funding for transparency purposes or
where Council believes a different rating basis
than that used for general rates is appropriate
(e.g. capital value rather than land value and
UAGC).
Targeted rates apply to the following activities:
• Roading
• Footpaths and berms
• Wastewater
• Water supply
• Stormwater
• CBD maintenance
• Earthquake strengthening
In response to significant costs arising as a result
of natural disasters, the Council may introduce
an additional targeted rate for a specified period
to fund the cost of reinstatement.
Fees and charges may be imposed to recover
either the full or a part of the cost of services
provided to reflect the private benefit to a
specific user.
Fees and charges include:
• Entry fees
• Hireage
• Regulatory charges
• Memberships
• Trade waste fees
• Private works
• Permit and consent fees

• Rent, lease and licences for land and buildings
• Service charges
• Fines and penalties
• Connection fees
• Retail sales
Fees and charges may be influenced by:
• The costs involved in providing the activity.
• The estimate of private benefit in using
the service.
• The ability to identify users and levy and
collect fees and charges in an administratively
efficient manner.
• The impact of fees and charges on the
achievement of community outcomes. For
example, swimming pool fees do not recover
the full cost of the private benefits because
this would discourage usage when Council
wishes to promote usage for the recreation,
health and aquatic safety of the community.
• The impact of fees and charges on demand for
the service. Setting a fee too high may reduce
usage of a facility and impose a greater cost on
ratepayers e.g. venue hireage rates at Council
venues such as the War Memorial Centre. For
regulatory activities, setting fees too high for
consents related to projects with key health and
safety risks (e.g. consents for solid fuel heaters)
may mean people avoid the consenting process
and expose themselves to risk.
• Legislative provisions relating to the activity
which may state fees must be based on
principles such as “reasonable cost” or where
the fees are specifically set by legislation e.g.
the Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act 2012.
• Affordability.
• Acceptable market rates.
• The level of fees at other Councils.
Council reviews its fees and charges on a regular
basis to ensure that increases in costs are
reflected or to maintain the underlying basis for
the setting of the fee.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 95 |

Revenue and financing policy

Lump sum contributions are where ratepayers
are asked to pay a capital (or lump sum)
payment toward meeting the cost of providing
an asset, rather than pay for those costs via an
annual targeted rate. Council does not accept
lump sum contributions.
Interest and dividends from investments
are used to either reduce rates or repay debt.
Council has resolved to apply income from its
holding company to the Wastewater activity to
reduce rates, and to repay loans in general rate
funded activities. Income from other investments
is applied to general rate funded activities to
repay debt.
Borrowing is not a source of revenue but is
rather a bridging mechanism to assist with the
financing of long-term assets. Borrowings are
repaid by other sources of revenue such as rates
or proceeds from asset sales.
Borrowing spreads the cost of an asset over
time. This enables the Council to match charges
placed on the community against the period
of benefits from the capital expenditure, so
that current ratepayers pay for the share of
the asset they use now, and future ratepayers
pay their share too. This principle is that of
intergenerational equity.
Council generally only uses borrowing to fund
capital expenditure and does not borrow to fund
its day to day operations. Borrowing may in
rare circumstances be used to fund operational
expenditure when it is financially prudent to
do so, for example when there is a significant
single year spike in operational costs, or where
there are clearly benefits delivered beyond
the immediate financial year in which the
expenditure is incurred (e.g. three-yearly longterm plan development costs or the repainting
of a Council building).
Borrowing is managed within the framework
specified in the Liability Management Policy.
While seeking to minimise interest costs and
| 96 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

financial risks associated with borrowing is of
primary importance, the Council seeks to match
the term of borrowings with the average life of
assets or period of benefits when practical.
Proceeds from asset sales are funds received
from selling Council assets, such as plant and
equipment or investments. Asset sale proceeds
will in the first instance go to repay debt that
may be associated with the activity. Wherever
the sale proceeds are greater than the known
debt or the replacement cost of the ‘like’ asset
then the proceeds will be made available for
debt reduction by Council resolution.
Development contributions allow local
authorities to recover capital expenditure related
to growth from developers who will benefit.
Councils may require development contributions
from developments where the effect, including
the cumulative effect, of development is to
require new or additional assets or assets of
increased capacity, and as a consequence the
Council incurs capital expenditure. This includes
capital expenditure a Council has already
incurred in anticipation of growth.
Council is anticipating some growth in
household numbers over the period of this LTP.
Areas are being developed for subdivision in
Springvale and Otamatea to accommodate this
growth. Council considers that it is appropriate
for developers to meet the costs resulting from
development and that these costs should not
fall to the existing ratepayer body. Council has
adopted a Development Contributions Policy to
recover costs from developers who create the
need and benefit from the assets created.
Financial contributions are a mechanism
provided for within the Resource Management
Act 1991 (RMA). Essentially, paid by developers,
financial contributions provide for managing the
effects of development on the wider community
by requiring money or land to be provided
for the purpose of avoiding, remedying or
mitigating adverse effects as a result of land use.

Council does not intend to use financial
contributions as a funding source.
Grants and subsidies are funds received
from external funding parties, usually for a
specific purpose. Some of these items are
predictable and can be budgeted (e.g. WINZ
employment subsidies), whereas others may be
unexpected or unpredictable (e.g. Civil Defence
reimbursements following emergencies).
Council receives subsidies from the New
Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) which cover
a substantial proportion of the capital and
maintenance costs of our roading network. This
is expected to continue into the future, although
subsidy levels have trended downward over time.
Other grants and subsidies from external
funding agencies are available from time to
time, particularly for capital projects such as the
Sarjeant Gallery redevelopment project.
Other sources include special funds which have
either been received by the Council from a third
party to be used in a specific way (restricted
funds e.g. bequests) or monies tagged by the
Council to be applied for a specific purpose or
area of benefit (non-restricted funds e.g. the
Parking special fund).

Revenue and financing policy

Our funding approach
Council delivers a broad range of activities to
district residents, ratepayers and visitors. We aim
to fund these activities in a fair and equitable
manner. To achieve this, we balance rates and
other funding mechanisms.
Rates are a form of taxation and as such the
amount paid does not necessarily reflect the
level of benefit received. Rates are not a charge
for the use of a service.
Transparency and accountability can be
enhanced where the community can make a
direct link between the services received and
charges imposed. User charges and targeted
rates are used when there is a degree of private
benefit, or when services are available to some
properties but not others (e.g. water supply).
We could create numerous targeted rates to
separately fund each of Council’s activities,
but this would compromise our desire to that
rates be simple and easily understood by the
community. For this reason, most activities are
funded from general rates. We provide further
information on the amount of funding for each
activity with the rate assessment to promote
transparency.

There are also legislative restrictions on the
level of fees and charges able to be charged in
some activities. There is generally a requirement
for Council to set its fees to be “actual and
reasonable” and some legislation goes further to
include “actual and reasonable costs” or to set
the actual fees via statute e.g. in the Sale and
Supply of Alcohol Act 2012.
• Rates are a tax. They do not directly reflect
benefit, use, or income.
• Separate rates may make for greater
transparency of costs but increase complexity
and may restrict future expenditure decisions
and lead to large fluctuations in movements.
• Differential rating is a valid means of achieving
an overall allocation of benefit.
• Uniform charges are not the only funding
option when benefits from a Council service
are not related to property value.

There are some legislative constraints in using
certain funding sources.
The Local Government (Rating) Act 2002
(LGRA) sets out the legal requirements for
rating. It covers who is liable to pay rates, what
land is rateable, what kind of rates may be
set and how those rates are set, the valuation
system which may be used and the various
rating mechanisms available (such as targeted
rates). The LGRA specifies that Council may
only collect 30% of its total rates revenue from
rates set on a uniform basis (excluding uniform
rates for water or wastewater). This means that
Council must use other mechanisms such as
valuation-based rates.
WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 97 |

Revenue and financing policy

Funding of operating
expenditure
Operating expenditure is the day-to-day spending
that maintains the services provided by Council.

• Grants and subsidies towards capital
expenditure from external parties such as
New Zealand Transport Agency. Council will
maximise grants, subsidies and other external
revenue sources wherever available.

To meet additional demand projects

• Development contributions

These projects will be funded by borrowing in
the first instance. The borrowing will be repaid
by development contributions and rates.

Council has determined the following basic
principles to guide the appropriate use of
funding sources for operating expenditure:

• Council special funds

• User charges are preferred when a private
benefit can be identified, it is efficient to
collect the revenue and charging does not
detract from achieving the desired
community outcomes.

• Rates

• Interest and dividends from investments may
offset rates requirements.
• Subsidies, grants and other income options are
fully explored prior to rates being used.
• Borrowing will only be used when it is
financially prudent to do so, for example when
there is a significant single year spike
in operational costs, or where there are
clearly benefits delivered beyond the
immediate financial year in which the
expenditure is incurred.
• General or targeted rates will fund any shortfall.

Funding of capital
expenditure
Capital expenditure is the category of spending
which creates a new asset or extends the lifetime
of an existing asset.
Council generally borrows to fund one-off capital
expenditure projects to smooth rates input and
account for intergenerational equity. Capital
expenditure items of a consistent annual nature
are rate funded.
The Council’s overall borrowing requirement may
be reduced to the extent that other funds are
available to finance capital expenditure. Such
other funds include:
| 98 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

• Proceeds from the sale of assets
• Operating surpluses
The following funding sources are used for each
category of capital expenditure under normal
circumstances, with any alternative funding
sources specifically resolved by the Council.
To replace existing assets projects
These are projects to replace existing assets
restore or replace components of an asset or the
entire asset to meet the current level of service
(to its original size, condition or capacity).
These projects will be funded from rates and if
applicable subsidy from NZTA for Roading. Other
grants are available from time to time. Special
funds are available to fund capital costs in some
activities e.g. parking meter replacements.
Borrowing may be used to smooth rates input
and reflect the expected life of the asset.

These are projects to meet additional demand
or provide additional capacity to accommodate
growth.

Summary of funding
mechanisms
Council utilises the following funding mechanisms
for operating and capital expenditure:
Funding mechanism

Capital

General rates (including
the UAGC)
Targeted rates
Lump sum
contributions
Fees and charges
Interest and dividends
from investments

To improve the level of service projects

Borrowing

These are projects to create a new asset or alter
an existing asset leading to a higher level of
service being delivered.

Proceeds from asset
sales

These projects will be funded by borrowing and
if applicable subsidy from NZTA for Roading.
Grants are available from time to time for some
projects, for example the Sarjeant Gallery
redevelopment.

Operating

*

Development
contributions
Financial contributions
(under the RMA 1991)
Grants and subsidies
Any other source
* In limited circumstances as outlined under the
Borrowing section of the policy.

Revenue and financing policy

Funding mechanisms for
each Council activity

Overall impact
adjustments

Council has undertaken a review to determine
the appropriate sources of funding for each of
its activities.

Council is required by section 101(3)(b) of
the LGA to consider the overall impact of its
allocation for liability for revenue needs on the
community. Council may, as a final measure,
modify the overall funding mix because of these
considerations.

The Revenue and Financing Policy summarises
the sources of funding the Council has decided
upon for each activity.
Council’s full consideration of the LGA section
101(3) factors in selection of the appropriate
funding mechanisms for each activity is available
in the Revenue and Financing Policy Funding
Needs Analyses which are available at
www.whanganui.govt.nz/Your-Council/PoliciesBylaws/Policies. The attached summary reflects
the outcome of the funding needs analysis
considerations.

Council considers the general rate differentials
resulting from the activity based funding
allocations each year to ensure that the overall
funding mix is appropriate and effects on
ratepayer groups are managed. This may involve
adjustments to differentials which may be
transitioned over a number of years.
The UAGC ensures that all properties pay a
minimum contribution to Council’s services.
Council sets the UAGC each year during its
Annual or Long-Term Plan deliberations, giving
consideration to the overall impact for revenue
needs on the community and the 30% cap on
rates set on a uniform basis (excluding water
and wastewater) under the Local Government
(Rating) Act 2002.
Proceeds from asset sales that are surplus
to replacement asset or debt repayment
requirements of the activity may be considered
for allocation to debt in other activities. The
overall funding impact will be considered by
Council in making any decision.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 99 |

Revenue and financing policy

Legend:

= Full (100%)

= Majority (> 67%)

= Partial (33% - 67%)

= Minority (< 33%)

Funding of operating expenditure

Activity

General
rates

Targeted
rates

Fees
and
charges

Other

(grants,
subsidies,
interest,
dividends)

Funding of capital
expenditure

Catchment

Commentary

Water supply

Borrowing
Targeted rates
Fees and charges
Development
contributions

Area of
service

Targeted rates to properties in serviced areas.
Water by meter charges set as targeted rates to
properties using more than residential volume.
Fees and charges to recover cost of new connections
and minor rental income.
Development contributions to fund debt incurred for
the expansion of services to cater for growth.

Stormwater

Borrowing
Targeted rates
Fees and charges
Development
contributions

Area of
service

Targeted rates to properties in serviced area.
Fees and charges to recover cost of new connections.
Development contributions to fund debt incurred for
the expansion of services to cater for growth.

Waterways
and natural
drainage

Borrowing
General rates
Development
contributions

District

Fully funded by the general rate.
Development contributions may be used if debt
incurred for the expansion of services to cater for
growth.

Area of
service

Targeted rates to properties in serviced areas.
Trade waste targeted rates and fees and charges apply
to reflect the costs involved in conveying, treating and
disposing of trade wastes.
Fees and charges to recover cost of new connections.
Dividend income offsets rates requirement for the
Wastewater network.
Development contributions to fund debt incurred for
the expansion of services to cater for growth.

District

Partially funded by targeted rates and partially funded
by New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA) subsidies
and petrol taxes.
Minor user fees income from rental and consultancy.
Development contributions to fund debt incurred for
the expansion of services to cater for growth.

Wastewater

Borrowing
Targeted rates
Fees and charges
Development
contributions

Roading

Borrowing
Targeted rates
Grants and subsidies
Development
contributions

| 100 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Revenue and financing policy

Legend:

= Full (100%)

= Majority (> 67%)

= Partial (33% - 67%)

= Minority (< 33%)

Funding of operating expenditure

Activity

General
rates

Targeted
rates

Fees
and
charges

Other

(grants,
subsidies,
interest,
dividends)

Funding of capital
expenditure

Catchment

Commentary

District

Majority funded by targeted rates. Subsidy income from
NZTA. Minor amount of rental income relating to road
reserves.
Development contributions may be used if debt incurred
for the expansion of services to cater for growth.

District

Majority general rate funded. Fees and charges for
exclusive access.
Other income e.g. grants and subsidies is available from
time to time. Some special funds are available.
Development contributions to fund debt incurred for
the expansion of services to cater for growth.

Borrowing
General rates
Fees and charges

District

Majority general rate funded. Rental income,
sponsorship income and revenue from the venue. Other
income e.g. grants and subsidies is available from time
to time.

Swimming
pools

General rates
Borrowing

District

Fully funded by the general rate. User fees retained by
operator to offset cost of service.

Community

General rates
Borrowing
Special funds

District

Majority general rate funded. Other income e.g. grants
and subsidies is available from time to time. Some
special funds are available.

New Zealand
Glassworks
Te Whare
Tuhua o Te Ao

General rates
Borrowing
Grants, bequests and
donations

District

Majority general rate funded. Fees and charges for retail
sales, courses and rental of the space to glass artists.
External sponsorship toward annual operating costs.

Footpaths &
berms

Targeted rates
Borrowing
Development
contributions

Parks and
reserves

Borrowing
General rates
Grants, bequests and
donations
Special funds
Development
contributions

Cooks
Gardens

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 101 |

Revenue and financing policy

Legend:

= Full (100%)

= Majority (> 67%)

= Partial (33% - 67%)

= Minority (< 33%)

Funding of operating expenditure

Activity

General
rates

Targeted
rates

Fees
and
charges

Other

(grants,
subsidies,
interest,
dividends)

Funding of capital
expenditure

Libraries

General rates
Borrowing
Proceeds from asset
sales

Sarjeant
Gallery
Te Whare
o Rehua
Whanganui

Borrowing
General rates
Grants, bequests,
donations,
sponsorship

Royal
Whanganui
Opera House

Borrowing
General rates
Fees and charges
Grants, bequests and
donations

Catchment

Commentary

District

Majority general rate funded, with minor fees and charges.
Other income e.g. grants and subsidies is available from
time to time. Asset sale proceeds may be used to fund
capital expenditure.

District

Majority general rate funded. Some donations and
income from the Gallery shop. Grants for education
service. Other income e.g. grants and subsidies is
available from time to time. External funding sources
(e.g. central government, grants, donations, sponsorship)
will provide a significant contribution toward the capital
cost of the Sarjeant Gallery redevelopment.

District

Majority general rate funded. Fees and charges for
exclusive access.
Other income e.g. grants and subsidies is available from
time to time.

War Memorial
Centre

Borrowing
General rates
Fees and charges
Grants, bequests and
donations

District

Majority general rate funded. Fees and charges for
exclusive access.
Other income e.g. grants and subsidies is available from
time to time.

Whanganui
Regional
Museum

Borrowing
General rates

District

Majority general rate funded. Small amount of rental
income.

Earthquake
strengthening

Borrowing
Targeted rates
Grants, bequests and
donations

District

Fully funded by targeted rates.

| 102 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Revenue and financing policy

Legend:

= Full (100%)

= Majority (> 67%)

= Partial (33% - 67%)

= Minority (< 33%)

Funding of operating expenditure

Activity

General
rates

Targeted
rates

Fees
and
charges

Other

(grants,
subsidies,
interest,
dividends)

Funding of capital
expenditure

Catchment

Commentary

Whanganui
& Partners
– Economic
Development

Borrowing
General rates

District

Majority general rate funded. Some grants available.

i-site Visitor
Information
Centre

Borrowing
General rates

District

Majority general rate funded. Some fees and charges for
booking commissions and shop sales.

Cemeteries

Borrowing
Fees and charges
General rates

User pays
District

Majority funded by fees and charges. Minor contribution
from the general rate.

CBD
maintenance

Borrowing
General rates

District

Majority funded by the general rate. Targeted rates
levied to properties in the CBD. Minor rental income.

Waste
minimisation

Borrowing
General rates

District

Majority general rate funded. Income from waste
disposal levies is used to fund waste reduction
initiatives.

Pensioner
housing

Borrowing
Fees and charges

User pays

Fully funded by rental income.

Community
buildings

Borrowing
General rates

District

Majority general rate funded. Fees and charges for
exclusive access. Other income e.g. grants and subsidies
is available from time to time.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 103 |

Revenue and financing policy

Legend:

= Full (100%)

= Majority (> 67%)

= Partial (33% - 67%)

= Minority (< 33%)

Funding of operating expenditure

Activity

General
rates

Targeted
rates

Fees
and
charges

Other

(grants,
subsidies,
interest,
dividends)

Funding of capital
expenditure

Catchment

Commentary

Emergency
management

Borrowing
General rates

District

Fully funded by the general rate. Other income e.g.
grants and subsidies is available from time to time
following an emergency event.

Building
control

Borrowing
General rates

User pays
District

Partially funded by fees and charges and partially from
the general rate.

Environmental
health

Borrowing
General rates

Parking
services

Special fund
Borrowing
General rates
Fees and charges

User pays
District

Primarily funded by parking fees and charges. Shortfall
(if any) funded from general rate. Surplus (if any)
to special fund for parking meter replacement or to
general rates.

Animal
management

Borrowing
General rates
Fees and charges

User pays
District

Primarily funded by fees and charges and with minority
funding from the general rate. Income from other
sources from time to time.

Resource
management

Borrowing
General rates

User pays
District

Funded partially by fees and charges and partially by
the general rate.

Environmental
policy

Borrowing
General rates

District

Majority to fully funded by the general rate. Grants
are available from time to time which provide a minor
source of income.

| 104 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

District
User pays

Majority general rate funded. Some fees and charges
income.

Revenue and financing policy

Legend:

= Full (100%)

= Majority (> 67%)

= Partial (33% - 67%)

= Minority (< 33%)

Funding of operating expenditure

Activity

Airport

Port & river

General
rates

Targeted
rates

Fees
and
charges

Other

(grants,
subsidies,
interest,
dividends)

Funding of capital
expenditure

Borrowing
General rates
Fees and charges

Borrowing
General rates

Catchment

Commentary

District
User pays

Council funds 50% of this activity, with the remainder
funded by the Crown as joint venture partner. Council’s
share is partially funded by the general rate and
partially funded by user fees and charges (aircraft
landing fees, car parking, rental income).

District

Any Port shortfall and the River control aspects of the
activity are funded via the general rate. Contracting
income for Council staff supporting the SPV is a minor
funding source for this activity. External funds e.g. from
central government may be available from time to time
for capital projects.

External funds

Durie Hill
elevator

Borrowing
General rates

District

User fees retained by operator to offset cost of service.
Net operating costs 50% funded by Horizons Regional
Council. Remaining 50% and asset related costs funded
by general rates.

City
Endowment

Borrowing
Special fund
Proceeds from asset
sales
Fees and charges

User pays

Rental income aims to funds expenses. Surplus or
deficit offsets general rates.

Investments

Borrowing
General rates

District

Funded by investment dividends and interest income,
with minor funding from user fees and charges and the
general rate.

Governance

Borrowing
General rates
Donations

District

Majority general rate funded. Income from other
sources from time to time.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 105 |

Revenue and financing policy

Legend:

= Full (100%)

= Majority (> 67%)

= Partial (33% - 67%)

= Minority (< 33%)

Funding of operating expenditure

Activity

General
rates

Targeted
rates

Fees
and
charges

Other

(grants,
subsidies,
interest,
dividends)

Funding of capital
expenditure

Catchment

Commentary

Corporate
management

Borrowing

Activities

Majority funded by overhead allocation to other Council
activities. Minor amount of fees and charges and
interest income.

Community &
operational
property

Borrowing
General rates
Fees and charges
Proceeds from asset
sales

District

Majority general rate funded. Rental income offsets
some costs.

| 106 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Financial Strategy

Financial Strategy
Where we’re going

Where we’ve been

The Council’s overarching vision is to be an
affordable and financially sustainable organisation
while at the same time delivering good quality
Council services and promoting growth within the
district. This can be summarised as living within
our means while still contributing to Whanganui
as a great place to live.

Our Financial Strategy over the last 10 years has
balanced the services the community desires
with what the community is prepared to pay
for those services through tightly controlled
expenditure, relatively low rate rises and large
debt increases due to the funding of large capital
projects, particularly the separation of the
wastewater and stormwater networks and the
building of a new wastewater treatment plant.

Growth: Whanganui’s population decline has
been stemmed and the population has begun
to grow consistently for the first time since
1996 and we now have a housing shortage to
contend with. We need to invest in infrastructure
to support new housing growth areas, and we
will also encourage infill growth in existing areas
while looking at other ways we can support
housing availability.

Council has been fortunate to have a number of
saleable investment assets that it has utilised
to part-fund some of these large infrastructure
projects which has meant that debt is lower than
it could have otherwise been, but we have few
remaining investment assets available to sell.

Significant capital projects: We have some
significant capital projects underway. We
have provided substantial investment in the
Port redevelopment in order to leverage
Government funding and maximise the economic
opportunities the project presents for the
community. Construction of the Sarjeant Gallery
redevelopment is well underway with significant
assistance from external funding sources, and
a new animal pound has been built. In this Plan
some of the significant capital projects proposed
are extending the library, creating a youth hub,
the development and implementation of a coastal
plan and replacing the Dublin Street bridge.

We constantly have to balance the range of
services and facilities we provide with the costs
involved in running them. Whanganui is fortunate
to have a great range of public facilities and
good quality infrastructure networks, but
keeping these facilities and networks maintained
to ever increasing standards is putting pressure
on our finances. In achieving this strategy our
focus is on:
• Managing our finances prudently
and sustainably
• Keeping rates at affordable levels
• Managing our assets to maximise value
for money and reduce risk
• Having a sustainable loan repayment
programme
• Improving our financial resilience
• Looking for efficiencies in the way we
do business
• Investigating and pursuing non-rates
revenue streams
• Encouraging sustainable growth

In general the community’s desire for low rate
increases has overridden the desire to fully fund
the expanding services and level of services
delivered. In fact Council has planned to increase
borrowings almost every year since 1999.

What’s on our mind
Over the past three years since our last Financial
Strategy was developed, our community, our
economy and our financial position has changed.
These are the things that are front of mind for us
now and as we move forward:
The economy and COVID-19: COVID-19 has
affected the international economy and has
resulted in substantial uncertainty and risks
to some of our investment returns, but also
has provided us with lower interest rates in
the short term. We are mindful of the fact that
COVID-19 has put financial pressure on some
of our ratepayers and we need to keep rates
affordability front of mind.

Looking after our assets: We have a significant
and ever increasing asset base to maintain.
Increasing standards and legislative changes are
putting pressure on us to maintain these assets
to a higher standard, and we also have climate
change to contend with which is increasing costs
in a number of areas such as stormwater and
roading. Our roading assets are facing increased
pressure with demands increasing beyond
what the assets were designed for. We are also
continuing to improve our asset information and
this has identified some additional investment
needs, particularly around our parks.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 107 |

Financial Strategy

Climate change: Climate change remains a
critical issue for the Whanganui community
moving into the future. In 2020 the Whanganui
District Council declared a climate emergency,
and has worked collaboratively with key
stakeholders and Iwi partners to develop a
Climate Change strategy for the District. The
Climate Change Strategy, Te Rautaki Huringa
Āhuarangi plots a course for action to both
mitigate and adapt to climate change and to
provide a framework for collaboration. We are
facing increased costs in a number of activities
like stormwater, roading and parks due to the
impacts of climate change.
Debt: Our debt is higher than we predicted in
our Long-Term Plan 2018-2028. Whilst we were
anticipating peak debt in 2019/20, our debt has
increased beyond this time and is now forecast
to continue to increase until 2023/24. This is
primarily due to additional investment in the
Port redevelopment, reducing our rates increase
last year due to COVID-19, additional population
growth requiring infrastructure investment
and increased investment in parks, water and
roading. Whilst we still have substantial capacity
to borrow within our debt limits, we must
consider the implications on current ratepayers
and future generations.
Business as usual cost increases: We are facing
increased costs just to deliver our standard suite
of services due to inflation and price escalation.
Costs like insurance have increased significantly.
We are also getting less subsidy from NZTA
from year 2 of this plan, with our subsidy rate
dropping from 61% to 60%.

Expanding our operations: During the course of
this plan we have some changes to our services
that affect our operating costs, like the opening
of the redeveloped Sarjeant Gallery in 2023
(year 3).
We are also doing work in a number of areas
like climate change, addressing our housing
shortage, investment in our youth and
investigating transport options to respond to
issues that are facing our community. This work
needs financial support.
Catering to changing community expectations
has led to an increase in services and facilities
and Council involvement in new areas, for
example welcoming communities, suburban
library hubs, heritage, and town centre
regeneration.
Balancing rates affordability, our work
programme and debt: We consistently need to
strike a balance between our work programme
and the services we deliver, our rates increases
and affordability, and our debt. Keeping rates
affordable and debt sustainable while managing
our assets and achieving our vision of a vibrant
district requires a delicate balancing act. We
have set our rates increase limit at the Local
Government inflation rate plus 2% in this plan.
We believe this is the maximum rates increase
that is affordable for our community.

Three waters reform
At the time of writing this Strategy Central
Government are reviewing options of how three
waters may be delivered in the future. Key
outcomes of this reform are:
1. Safe, acceptable and reliable drinking water;
2. Better environmental performance; efficient,
sustainable, resilient and accountable
services; and
3. Achieving this in a way that is affordable for
ratepayers.
The Council has signed a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) effective until 30 June
2021 with the Crown regarding the reform. This
MOU supports parties working together to
identify an approach to service delivery reform.
While the final model for the delivery of the
three waters has not been completed, it is likely
the outcome will be the establishment of water
service delivery entities that are:
• of significant scale (most likely multi-regional)
to enable benefits from aggregation to be
achieved over the medium to long-term;
• asset owning entities, with balance sheet
separation to support improved access to
capital, alternative funding instruments and
improved balance sheet strength; and
• structured as statutory entities with
appropriate and relevant commercial
disciplines and competency-based boards
Council participation in a new water service
delivery entity would have a significant effect on
Council’s finances and balance sheet. At present
there remains a high level of uncertainty around
the final outcomes of this reform.
Due to this uncertainty, we have assumed
Council ownership of the three water assets for
the duration of the Strategy.

| 108 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Financial Strategy

Our community 2021-2031
Population growth
In 2019, the Whanganui District had an estimated
population of 47,300, which reflects significant
migration to Whanganui since the 2013 Census.
Whanganui’s tide turned in 2014 when the
population began to grow after declining in all
but two years since 1996. Average growth during
the six-year period from 2014 to 2019 was 630
people per annum (~1.3% per annum). One of
the factors that has facilitated this growth has
been available housing stock, with Whanganui
having only recently (2018) surpassed its 1996
population level of 46,000.

Whanganui District Population Projections - Long Term Plan 2021 - 2031

57,000
56,000
55,000
54,000
53,000
52,000
51,000
50,000
49,000
48,000
47,000
46,000

43,000
42,000
41,000

Actual population

2051

2046

2041

2036

2031

2026

2021

2016

2011

2006

40,000
2001

The Infometrics ‘midrange’ predicts population
at the beginning of the planning period of
48,200 in 2021, rising to 51,200 by 2031 and
approximately 55,500 by 2050. This is an
average increase of around 330 people per
annum for the first 10 years of the Long-Term
Plan, and an average increase of 220 people
from years 10 to 30 of the Long-Term Plan.

45,000
44,000

1996

In the first quarter of 2020, Infometrics was
commissioned to produce regional and district
population projections based on employment
projections.

Infometrics - Mid-range forecast

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 109 |

Financial Strategy

Household and
dwelling growth

Population
demographics

Our projected population growth over the
next ten years, together with a decrease in the
average occupancy per household, means we are
projecting an increasing number of households.

The community’s ability to pay for services
is affected by its wealth and income, future
expectations of wealth and income and the
number of people who can share the cost of
Council provided services.

During the 30-year planning timeframe
household sizes are predicted to drop from 2.3
people per household to 2.2.
At the 2018 Census, the number of empty
dwellings was 3.7%, which is below the national
average of 5.2%. This means that further
population growth is reliant on the construction
of new dwellings. Based on pre-COVID-19
Infometrics employment forecasting of sector
size and historical residential construction
capacity, new builds for dwellings are predicted
to be between 130 and 140 new dwellings per
year (up from between 60 and 117 dwellings in
the last Long-Term Plan).
Greenfield and brownfield growth capacity is
expected to last between 7-10 years at current
construction levels for new dwellings.
Managing an unprecedented growth forecast is a
challenge and also an opportunity. Growth adds
vibrancy, and attracts businesses, investment
and events to the district.

| 110 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

From the 2018 census, median income for
families was significantly lower in Whanganui
at $49,200 compared to the then national
average of $75,700. Approximately 57% of the
population aged 15 and over was employed
which is less than the national average of 65%.
Whanganui has a higher proportion of people
not in the labour force (38%) compared to the
national average (31%) whilst the unemployment
rate has remained stable at 5%.
Compared to national averages, the population
is slightly older, less ethnically diverse, less well
educated and less wealthy. The average age of
Whanganui residents is also increasing resulting
in more people being on fixed incomes.
For the Long-Term Plan 2021-2031 it is assumed
that the Whanganui community will continue to
have lower incomes, lower income growth, and
a lower percentage of the population employed
than the national average.

Financial Strategy

Our financial
position 2021-2031
Our capital expenditure
programme
A key part of our Financial Strategy involves
balancing the requirements of our Infrastructure
Strategy with our financial limits.
Council manages a portfolio of over $1.8B in
assets. The majority of these assets relate to
our core infrastructure – roading, stormwater,
wastewater and water supply.
In this plan we plan to spend $210M replacing
our existing assets, $94M on purchasing new
assets and an additional $19.0M on infrastructure
assets relating to growth. The following is a
summary of infrastructure capital expenditure
for years 2021/22 – 2030/31:
Funding for this capital expenditure will come
from a number of sources, including new
loans, government subsidies (e.g. New Zealand
Transport Agency funding for roads), grants,
development contributions (growth related
capital expenditure) and rates.
Replacing existing assets
To ensure best value in our infrastructure spend
to maintain our levels of service we take a
strategic approach to its assessment of asset
condition, criticality and performance and adopt
a risk based approach. This approach ensures
that assets are adequately funded, risks are
minimised, planned preventative maintenance
occurs, there is a high degree of confidence in the
asset data available and capital investment can be
optimised. Further information on this approach
can be found in our Infrastructure Strategy.

Replace existing
assets

New assets

Maintain levels of
service

Increase levels of
service

$133.2M

$22.2M

$6.1M

Stormwater & waterways

$4.7M

$18.3M

$8.0M

Wastewater

$11.7M

$4.3M

$3.5M

Water supply

$15.8M

$4.6M

$1.4M

Other

$44.8M

$44.8M

Total

$210.2M

$94.2M

Roading & footpaths

Replacing the Dublin Street Bridge at an
estimated cost of $50M is a significant
contributor to our $210M budget for replacing
existing assets over the ten year period. We have
assumed NZTA will subsidise 60% of this project,
leaving Council to fund the remaining $20M.
New assets
We have a number of significant capital projects
planned over the ten year period of this plan,
including the completing the redevelopment
and extension of the Sarjeant Gallery, theDavis
Library extension and work on the velodrome
facility. Many of our community asset projects
assume a substantial level of external funding
from grants, donations and sponsorship. We
are reliant on external funding to deliver these
community projects in order to keep rates
affordable for our community, to meet our
limits on rates increases set out in this Financial
Strategy, and to manage our debt levels.

Growth

$19.0M

We are continuing to invest in upgrading our
stormwater system to better cope with climate
change, as discussed in our last Long-Term Plan
2018-2028.
For further information, see our detailed Capital
Expenditure Schedules.
Growth
With growth comes the need for Council to
invest in new infrastructure and this is expensive
– we have budgeted $19M over the period of this
plan. We have considered who benefits from this
infrastructure and have revised our Development
Contributions Policy to ensure that developers
and new ratepayers pay an appropriate share
of the cost. Around half of our infrastructure
investment for growth is anticipated to be repaid
by development contribution income over the
period 2021-2031.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 111 |

Financial Strategy

As an example of compliance of this limit,
our debt level in year 1 of the plan is 109% of
our total revenue. That’s the equivalent of a
household earning $50,000 per year and having
a mortgage of $54,600.

During the course of this plan we have some
changes to our services that affect our operating
costs, like the opening of the redeveloped
Sarjeant Gallery in 2023 (year 3). We are facing
increased costs to maintain our parks and
reserves and look after our roads. We are also
doing work in a number of areas like climate
change, addressing our housing shortage, and
youth to respond to issues that are facing our
community. This work needs financial support.

We are required to have a limit on debt to help
facilitate prudent financial management. We
have set our debt limit at:

Even those parts of our operation that are
continuing with business as usual find that costs
grow each year because prices for items such as
labour and materials increase. Insurance costs
in particular have increased significantly. These
cost increases have partly been offset by lower
interest costs due to interest rates reducing.

This is the same as the limit in our last Financial
Strategy and is well within the requirements of
our credit rating agency Standard and Poor’s
and the Local Government Funding Agency
(LGFA). The LGFA’s current debt limit for local
authorities is net debt less than 300% of total
revenue, reducing to 280% by 30 June 2026.

Our debt

Debt compared to debt limit (200% of total revenue)

| 112 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

* Net debt is defined as total debt less cash
or near cash financial investments
** Total revenue excludes development
contributions and non-cash items

We will loan fund $108M of capital projects over
the ten year period, but we have planned to
repay $113M of debt over the same period. With
these mechanisms in place we expect our debt
balance to be $108M by 30 June 2031. This is
80% of our total revenue. That’s the equivalent
of a household earning $50,000 per year and
having a mortgage of around $40,100.

29
/3
20

/2
28

0

9

8
20

27

/2

7

80%

81%

93%

/3
1

102%

20

26
/2

25
/2

112%

20

6

123%

20

24
/2

4
23
/2

/2
22
20

20

2
/2

3

Debt

131%

5

135%

135%

109%

20

$300M
$275M
$250M
$225M
$200M
$175M
$150M
$125M
$100M
$75M
$50M
$25M
$0M

21

Our plan in our last Financial Strategy was to
focus on reducing our debt balance once the
wastewater treatment plant was built. However
a number of things have changed in the
intervening three years, for example additional
investment in the port redevelopment, additional
population growth requiring infrastructure
investment, and the plan to extend the Davis
Library, work on the velodrome facility and
implement the coastal plan. We also now have
the replacement of the Dublin Street bridge
coming into the tail end of this plan period in
years 9 and 10. With these large projects in our
sights, our plan is to keep debt at sustainable
levels over the period of the plan so as not to

• Net debt* less than 200% of total revenue**

20

We begin this Long-Term Plan with an opening
debt balance of $121M following our significant
infrastructure investments of the past 30 years.

Our debt will continue to move higher than we
had previously expected and is now expected
to peak at $132M in 2023/24 (135% of our debt
limit). We still have substantial available capacity
to borrow within our limits should an unexpected
event like a natural disaster occur.

30

We plan to spend $76M on average over the ten
years of this plan on operating our services.

burden future generations. A substantial part of
achieving this is our loan repayment programme,
along with the support of external funding to
deliver many of our large capital projects.

20

Our operations

Debt limit (200% of total revenue)

Financial Strategy

Your rates
Council has historically kept rates increases low
due to affordability concerns for its ratepayers.
Our average rates increase over the last 10 years
is 4.1%.

• Rates increases (excluding water by meter,
trade waste targeted rates and penalties) no
more than the Local Government inflation
rate plus 2% (after accounting for growth)

We are required to set a limit on rates increases
in our Financial Strategy. After looking at our
budgets, considering rates affordability, and
while continuing to provide services to our
community and repay debt, we have set our
limit on rates increases at:

The average rate increase to existing ratepayers
for 2021/22 is proposed to be set at 5.7%, the
maximum allowed within our Financial Strategy
limit. On average, we are proposing rates
increases of 3.1% over the course of this plan.

This level of rate funding will allow us to maintain
the levels of service set out in this plan, provide
for expected growth, and deliver the projects
outlined when combined with our other sources
of income like development contributions, fees
and charges, subsidies and grants.
The forecast rates increase for the duration of
this Long-Term Plan 2021-2031 are:

2021/22

2022/23

2023/24

2024/25

2025/26

2026/27

2027/28

2028/29

2029/30

2030/31

Proposed rates
increase*

5.7%

3.9%

2.8%

3.3%

3.5%

2.3%

2.3%

2.0%

2.1%

3.3%

Rates increase limit

5.7%

4.9%

4.5%

4.5%

4.6%

4.5%

4.6%

4.7%

4.7%

4.6%

*Assuming growth in the rating database of $300,000 per annum

Rates increases compared to rates increase limit
5.7%
3.9%

4%

2.8%

3%

3.5%

3.3%

3.3%
2.3%

2.3%

2%

2.0%

2.1%

0

5%

9

6%

1%
/3
1
30
20

/2
28

29
/3
20

8
20

27

/2

7
20

26
/2

6

Proposed rates increase

20

25
/2

5
20

4

24
/2
20

23
/2
20

/2
22
20

20

21

/2

3

2

0%

Rates increase limit

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 113 |

Financial Strategy

Increasing user fees and
other non-rate income
User fees and other non-rate income such as
Government subsidies, grants and investment
income, make up approximately 30 to 40
percent of Council’s funding requirements.
Our major external funding source is NZTA
subsidies for our roads. From year 2 of this plan
our subsidy rate is decreasing from 61% to 60%.
This adds an average of $238,000 per year to
rates over the ten year period.
We have forecast reduced investment income
in year 1 and 2 of our plan due to the impacts
on COVID-19 on our Holding Company’s
investments. There is substantial uncertainty
around the impacts of COVID-19 into the future.
Fees and charges are set for some activities
where this is a private benefit that the user of
the service receives. There are a number of
activities where we do not charge fees or keep
fees low in order to increase usage to achieve

our community outcomes, for example swimming
pools, libraries, and the Sarjeant Gallery.
Demand for land means developers are opening
up new land developments which we need to
provide infrastructure for. We have forecast $9M
of development contribution income over the
ten year period of this plan. We have considered
who benefits from the infrastructure and have
revised our Development Contributions Policy
to ensure that developers and new ratepayers
pay an appropriate share of the cost. Around
half of our infrastructure investment for growth
is anticipated to be repaid by development
contribution income over the period 2021-2031.
We have forecast a substantial level of external
funding for some of the community asset
projects in our plan, like the Sarjeant Gallery
redevelopment and the Davis Library extension.
We are reliant on external funding to deliver
these community projects in order to keep
rates affordable for our community, to meet our
limits on rates increases set out in this Financial
Strategy, and to manage our debt levels.

changes in market conditions and Government
policy. While Council takes every opportunity to
leverage external sources of funding, the funding
is often application based, has a finite period
and is subject to policy changes.
For further information on how we fund our
activities, see our Revenue and Financing Policy.

Securities
In order to borrow money, Council has to offer
some security just like residents with their
mortgage. Council offers a charge over rates
and rates revenue, as security for general
borrowing programmes and interest rate risk
management activity. From time to time, with
prior Council approval and the Trustee, security
may be offered by providing a charge over
one or more of Council’s assets. Council offers
security under a Debenture Trust Deed.

Some of our non-rate income is subject to

Investments
The Council holds investments in property, companies and joint ventures (JV) and bonds
(see below for details).
Council holds property investments in the City Endowment.

Entity

Principal reason for investing

Budgeted return

City Endowment

Benefit the people of Wanganui via
revenue to offset rates

6.5% Return on Investment

(Refer to Council’s Investment Policy on our website www.whanganui.govt.nz for more details
regarding these property investments.)

| 114 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

During 2020/21 Council established Whanganui
Port Limited Partnership. Council’s Harbour
endowment and Port assets are intended to be
transferred to this new entity by 30 June 2021.

Financial Strategy

Companies and other entities that Council invests in are:
Company/Joint Venture

Shareholding

Principal reason for investing

Budgeted return

Whanganui District Council
Holdings Limited (WDCHL)

100%

Manage other investments

$500k Years 1-2, thereafter $1 million

GasNet Limited

100% shareholding by WDCHL

Provide return on investment

$1.2 - $1.8 million paid to WDCHL

New Zealand International
Commercial Pilot Academy Limited

100% shareholding by WDCHL

Business and economic
development within Whanganui

Nil

Whanganui Port General Partner
Limited (WPGPL)

100% shareholding by WDCHL

Maintenance and development
of the sea port

Nil

Whanganui Port Limited Partnership

Units held by WDC; 100%
shareholding by WPGPL

Maintenance and development
of the sea port

Nil

Wanganui Airport Joint Venture

50%

Provide an essential service to t
he District

Nil

Manawatu Wanganui Local Authority
Shared Services Ltd

14%

Efficient service delivery and
reduced costs

Nil

New Zealand Local Authority
Funding Agency

0.4%

Effective borrowings and Reduced
interest costs

Nil

New Zealand Local Government
Insurance Corporation Limited

2.6%

Risk management

Nil

Sarjeant Gallery Trust Board

100%

Support the Sarjeant Art Gallery

Nil

Whanganui and Partners Ltd

100%

Economic Development

Nil

Wanganui River Enhancement
Charitable Trust

33%

Health of the River

Nil

New Zealand Master Games Limited

49%

Sport

Nil

Whanganui Resource Recovery
Centre Trust

40%

Manage and promote a Resource
recovery centre

Nil

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 115 |

Significance and Engagement Policy

Significance and
Engagement
Policy
Our Significance and Engagement Policy outlines
our approach to determining the significance of
proposals and decisions, and includes criteria
and procedures we will use in assessing which
issues, proposals, decisions and other matters
are significant.
This policy:
• Enables the Council and its communities to
identify the degree of significance attached to
particular issues, proposals, assets, decisions
and activities.
• Provides clarity about how and when
communities can expect to be engaged in
decisions made by Council.
• Informs the Council from the beginning of a
decision-making process about the extent,
form and type of engagement required.
The full policy can be found on the Council
website: www.whanganui.govt.nz

| 116 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Water and sanitary assessment and Waste Management and
Minimisation Plan/Property Portfolio Investment Plan

Water and sanitary assessment and
Waste Management and
Minimisation Plan
The Water and Sanitary Services Assessment
was undertaken in 2005, reviewed in 2009 with
the Rural Water being updated in 2012.
Given the recent establishment of Taumata
Arowai (the water services regulator) the
new water services bill (currently going
through Parliament) and the 3 waters review
(government’s preferred option to be announced
later this calendar year and council decisions
required towards the end of the year). We have
decided that any update is deferred until the
implications and responsibilities of these major
pieces of work are known.
Significate improvements to ensure public health
since the assessment are listed below:
Water Supply
•
•
•
•

New production bore developed
Abelard Bore, Blueskin Bore decommissioned
Westmere joined to the urban network
Public Health Risk Management Plans
approved for water schemes

Stormwater
• Healthy Streams Initiative initiated
• Condition assessment and modelling of
in-ground assets undertaken
Cemeteries
• New cemetery extension at
Aramoho Cemetery

Property
Portfolio
Investment Plan
The purpose of this Plan is to outline a
transparent and strategic process for the way in
which we manage Council’s property investment
and divestment opportunities. It also provides
a framework for managing property investment
risk.
You can view this on www.whanganui.govt.nz

Airport
• Connected Airport wastewater system
to network
• Separated stormwater from wastewater
at Airport
• Connected Airport to city water supply
Public Toilets
• Additional public toilet facilities provided
in the CBD, and in Wanganui East to meet
demand
Our Waste Management and Minimisation Plan is
currently under review. The existing plan can be
found on the Council website:
www.whanganui.govt.nz.

Wastewater
• Wastewater Treatment Plant commissioned
• Landguard camp connected to Wastewater
network
• Two campervan effluent disposal facilities
installed at Springvale Park
• Trade waste Bylaw developed

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 117 |

Statement of accounting policies

Statement of accounting policies
Reporting entity
Whanganui District Council (“the Council” and
“WDC”) is a territorial local authority established
and governed by the Local Government Act
2002, and is domiciled and operates in
New Zealand.
The group consists of the ultimate parent
Whanganui District Council (WDC) and its
subsidiaries, Whanganui Airport Joint Venture
(50%), and Whanganui District Council Holdings
Limited (100% owned) which in turn owns 100%
of GasNet Limited, the New Zealand Commercial
Pilot Academy Limited and Whanganui Port
General Partner Limited (WPGPL). WPGPL has
100% shareholding in Whanganui Port Limited
Partnership and Whanganui Port Operating
Company Limited. WDC also owns 100% units
in Whanganui Port Limited Partnership. WDC’s
49% equity share of New Zealand Masters
Games Limited, its 15% interest in the Manawatu
Wanganui LASS Limited and its 33% interest in
the Whanganui River Enhancement Trust are
equity accounted. All WDC subsidiaries and
associates are domiciled in New Zealand.
The Council’s financial statements are for
Whanganui District Council and the Wanganui
Airport Joint Venture (50%) as an activity of
Council. The Council has not presented group
prospective financial statements because the
Council believes that the parent prospective
financial statements are more relevant to users.
The main purpose of prospective financial
statements in the Long-Term Plan is to provide
users with information about the core services
that the Council intends to provide ratepayers,
the expected cost of those services and as a
consequence how much the Council requires
by way of rates to fund the intended levels of

| 118 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

service. The level of rates funding required is not
affected by subsidiaries except to the extent that
the Council obtains distributions from, or further
invests in, those subsidiaries. Such effects are
included in the prospective financial statements
of the Council. The financial information contained
within the Long-Term Plan may not be appropriate
for purposes other than those described.

Statement of compliance
and basis of preparation
The prospective financial statements have been
prepared on a going concern basis and accounting
policies have been applied consistently
throughout the period of the Long-Term Plan.
The financial statements have been prepared in
accordance with the requirements of the Local
Government Act 2002 (LGA), which includes
the requirement to comply with New Zealand
generally accepted accounting practice (NZ
GAAP), and the Long-Term Plan requirements
of section 93 of the LGA. It is audited under
section 94 of the LGA. The primary purpose
of WDC is to provide goods or services for the
community or social benefit rather than making
a financial return. Accordingly, for reporting
purposes, the Council is a public benefit entity.
The prospective financial statements comply
with the standards for public sector public
benefit entities reporting under tier 1 of
the framework and have been prepared in
accordance with public benefit entity financial
reporting standard 42; Prospective Financial
Statements (PBE FRS 42).
The Council authorised the prospective financial
statements on 22 June 2021.

The Council, who are authorised to do so and
believe that the assumptions underlying these
prospective financial statements on pages 84-89
are appropriate, has approved the Long-Term
Plan for distribution.
No actual financial results have been
incorporated within the prospective financial
statements. Actual financial results achieved
for the period covered are likely to vary from
the information presented. These variations
may be material. The final prospective financial
statements was adopted by the Council on 22
June 2021.
The financial statements are presented in New
Zealand dollars and all values are rounded to the
nearest thousand dollars ($000).

Measurement base
The financial statements have been prepared
on a historical cost basis, modified by the
revaluation of land and buildings, certain
infrastructural assets, investment property
and certain financial instruments (including
derivative instruments).

Specific accounting policies
The following accounting policies, which
materially affect the measurement of results and
financial position, have been applied.

Statement of accounting policies

Revenue
Revenue is measured at the fair value of
consideration received or receivable.
Revenue from an exchange transaction arises
where the Council supplies goods or services at
a market rate, and where equal value, usually in
the form of cash, is received. A non-exchange
transaction is where the Council receives goods
or services from another entity without giving
approximate equal value in return. Many services
Council provides are subsidised by rates and
are thus non-exchange. An inflow of resources
from a non-exchange transaction recognised
as an asset, is recognised as revenue, except to
the extent that a liability is also recognised in
respect of the same inflow.
Rates revenue
Rates are set annually by a resolution from
Council and relate to a financial year. All
ratepayers are invoiced within the financial year
to which the rates have been set. Rates revenue
is recognised when payable.
Revenue from water rates by meter is recognised
on an accrual basis. Unbilled usage, as a result
of unread meters at year-end, is accrued on an
average usage basis.
Rates revenue is a non-exchange transaction.
Government grants
WDC receives government grants from the New
Zealand Transport Agency, which subsidises part
of WDC’s costs in maintaining the local roading
infrastructure. The subsidies are recognised
as revenue upon entitlement as conditions
pertaining to eligible expenditure have been
fulfilled. Government grants are generally
regarded as a non-exchange transaction.
Provision of services
Revenue from the rendering of services is
recognised by reference to the stage of

completion of the transaction at balance date,
based on the actual service provided as a
percentage of the total services to be provided.
The provision of services is regarded as a nonexchange transaction where the activity is
subsidised by rates.
Vested assets
Where a physical asset is acquired for nil or
nominal consideration, the fair value of the asset
received is recognised as income. Assets vested
in WDC are recognised as revenue when control
over the asset is obtained.
Vested assets revenue is a non-exchange
transaction.
Sale of goods
Revenue from sales of goods is recognised when
a product is sold to the customer. Revenue from
the sale of goods is an exchange transaction
where the sale is at market value and no subsidy
from rates is given.
Traffic and parking infringements
Traffic and parking infringements are recognised
when tickets are issued.
Interest and dividends
Interest income is recognised using the effective
interest method. Interest income is exchange
revenue.
Dividends are recognised when the right to
receive payment has been established. Dividend
income is exchange revenue.
Development contributions
Development contributions are recognised as
revenue when the council provides, or is able to
provide, the service for which the contribution
was charged. Otherwise development
contributions are recognised as liabilities until
such time the Council provides or is able to
provide, the service.

Borrowing costs
All borrowing costs are recognised as an
expense in the period in which they are incurred.

Leases
Finance leases
A finance lease is a lease that transfers to the
lessee substantially all the risks and rewards
incidental to ownership of an asset, whether or
not title is eventually transferred.
At the commencement of the lease term, WDC
recognises finance leases as assets and liabilities
in the statement of financial position at the lower
of the fair value of the leased item or the present
value of the minimum lease payments.
The finance charge is charged to the surplus or
deficit over the lease period so as to produce
a constant periodic rate of interest on the
remaining balance of the liability.
The amount recognised as an asset is
depreciated over its useful life. If there is
no certainty as to whether WDC will obtain
ownership at the end of the lease term, the asset
is fully depreciated over the shorter of the lease
term and its useful life.
Operating leases
An operating lease is a lease that does not
transfer substantially all the risks and rewards
incidental to ownership of an asset. Lease
payments under an operating lease are
recognised as an expense on a straight-line basis
over the lease term.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 119 |

Statement of accounting policies

Cash and cash equivalents

Financial assets

Cash and cash equivalents includes cash on
hand, deposits held at call with banks, other
short-term highly liquid investments with
original maturities of three months or less, and
bank overdrafts.

WDC’s investments in its subsidiary and
associate companies are held at cost.

Bank overdrafts are shown within borrowings
in current liabilities in the statement of financial
position.

Debtors and other
receivables
Short-term receivables are recorded at the
amount due, less an allowance for expected credit
losses (ECL).
The Council and group apply the simplified ECL
model of recognising lifetime ECL for receivables.
In measuring ECLs, receivables have been
grouped into rates receivables, and other
receivables, and assessed on a collective basis as
they possess shared credit risk characteristics.
They have then been grouped based on the days
past due. A provision matrix is then established
based on historical credit loss experience,
adjusted for forward looking factors specific to
the debtors and the economic environment.
Rates are “written-off”:
• when remitted in accordance with the
Council’s rates remission policy; and
• in accordance with the write-off criteria
of sections 90A (where rates cannot be
reasonably recovered) and 90B (in relation to
Māori freehold land) of the Local Government
(Rating) Act 2002.
• Other receivables are written-off when there
is no reasonable expectation of recovery.

| 120 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Other financial assets (other than shares in
subsidiaries) are initially recognised at fair value.
They are then classified as, and subsequently
measured under, the following categories:
• amortised cost;
• fair value through other comprehensive
revenue and expense (FVTOCRE); or
• fair value through surplus and deficit
(FVTSD).
Transaction costs are included in the carrying
value of the financial asset at initial recognition,
unless it has been designated at FVTSD, in which
case it is recognised in surplus or deficit.
The classification of a financial asset depends on
its cash flow characteristics and the Council and
group’s management model for managing them.
A financial asset is classified and subsequently
measured at amortised cost if it gives rise to
cash flows that are ‘solely payments of principal
and interest (SPPI)’ on the principal outstanding,
and is held within a management model whose
objective is to collect the contractual cash flows
of the asset.
A financial asset is classified and subsequently
measured at FVTOCRE if it gives rise to
cash flows that are SPPI and held within a
management model whose objective is achieved
by both collecting contractual cash flows and
selling financial assets.
Financial assets that do not meet the criteria
to be measured at amortised cost or FVTOCRE
are subsequently measured at FVTSD. However,
the Council and group may elect at initial
recognition to designate an equity investment
not held for trading as subsequently measured
at FVTOCRE.

Initial recognition of concessionary loans
Loans made at nil or below-market interest rates
are initially recognised at the present value of
their expected future cash flows, discounted at
the current market rate of return for a similar
financial instrument. For loans to community
organisations, the difference between the loan
amount and present value of the expected future
cash flows of the loan is recognised in surplus or
deficit as a grant expense.
Subsequent measurement of financial assets
at amortised cost
Financial assets classified at amortised cost are
subsequently measured at amortised cost using
the effective interest method, less any expected
credit losses. Where applicable, interest accrued
is added to the investment balance. Instruments
in this category include term deposits,
community loans, and loans to subsidiaries and
associates.
Subsequent measurement of financial assets
at FVTOCRE
Financial assets in this category that are debt
instruments are subsequently measured at
fair value with fair value gains and losses
recognised in other comprehensive revenue and
expense, except expected credit losses (ECL)
and foreign exchange gains and losses are
recognised in surplus or deficit. When sold, the
cumulative gain or loss previously recognised
in other comprehensive revenue and expense is
reclassified to surplus and deficit. The Council
and group do not hold any debt instruments in
this category.
Financial assets in this category that are
equity instruments designated as FVTOCRE
are subsequently measured at fair value with
fair value gains and losses recognised in other
comprehensive revenue and expense. There is no
assessment for impairment when fair value falls
below the cost of the investment. When sold, the
cumulative gain or loss previously recognised
in other comprehensive revenue and expense

Statement of accounting policies

is transferred to accumulated funds within
equity. The Council and group designate into
this category all equity investments that are not
included in its investment fund portfolio, and if
they are intended to be held for the medium to
long-term.
Subsequent measurement of financial assets
at FVTSD
Financial assets in this category are
subsequently measured at fair value with fair
value gains and losses recognised in surplus or
deficit.
Interest revenue and dividends recognised from
these financial assets are separately presented
within revenue.
Instruments in this category include the
Council and group’s investment fund portfolio
(comprising of listed shares, bonds, and units in
investment funds) and LGFA borrower notes.
Expected credit loss allowance (ECL)
The Council and group recognise an allowance
for ECLs for all debt instruments not classified
as FVTSD. ECLs are the probability-weighted
estimate of credit losses, measured at the
present value of cash shortfalls, which is the
difference between the cash flows due to
Council and group in accordance with the
contract and the cash flows it expects to receive.
ECLs are discounted at the effective interest rate
of the financial asset.
ECLs are recognised in two stages. ECLs are
provided for credit losses that result from
default events that are possible within the next
12 months (a 12-month ECL). However, if there
has been a significant increase in credit risk
since initial recognition, the loss allowance is
based on losses possible for the remaining life of
the financial asset (Lifetime ECL).
When determining whether the credit risk of
a financial asset has increased significantly

since initial recognition, the Council and
group considers reasonable and supportable
information that is relevant and available
without undue cost or effort. This includes
both quantitative and qualitative information
and analysis based on the Council and group’s
historical experience and informed credit
assessment and including forward-looking
information.
The Council and group considers a financial
asset to be in default when the financial asset is
more than 90 days past due. The Council and
group may determine a default occurs prior to
this if internal or external information indicates
the entity is unlikely to pay its credit obligations
in full.

Derivative financial
instruments
Derivative financial instruments are used to
manage exposure to foreign exchange risks
arising from the Council and group’s operational
activities and interest rate risks arising from
the Council’s and group’s financing activities. In
accordance with its treasury policies, the Council
and group does not hold or issue derivative
financial instruments for trading purposes.
Derivatives are initially recognised at fair value
on the date a derivative contract is entered
into and are subsequently remeasured to their
fair value at each balance date. The method of
recognising the resulting gain or loss depends
on whether the derivative is designated as a
hedging instrument, and, if so, the nature of the
item being hedged.

remaining maturity of the hedged item is more
than 12 months, and as current if the remaining
maturity of the hedged item is less than 12
months.
The full fair value of a non-hedge accounted
foreign exchange derivative is classified as
current if the contract is due for settlement
within 12 months of balance date; otherwise,
foreign exchange derivatives are classified as
non-current. The portion of the fair value of a
non-hedge accounted interest rate derivative
that is expected to be realised within 12 months
of balance date is classified as current, with the
remaining portion of the derivative classified as
non-current.

Inventories
Inventories (such as spare parts and other items)
held for distribution or consumption in the
provision of services that are not supplied on a
commercial basis are measured at the lower of
cost, adjusted when applicable, for any loss of
service potential. Where inventories are acquired
at no cost or for nominal consideration, the cost
is the current replacement cost at the date of
acquisition.
The amount of any write-down for the loss of
service potential or from cost to net realisable
value is recognised in the surplus or deficit in the
period of the write-down.

The associated gains or losses on derivatives
that are not hedge accounted are recognised in
surplus or deficit
The full fair value of a hedge accounted
derivative is classified as non-current if the
WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 121 |

Statement of accounting policies

Non-current assets
held for sale
Non-current assets held for sale are classified
as held for sale if their carrying amount will be
recovered principally through a sale transaction
rather than through continuing use. Non-current
assets held for sale are recorded at lower of their
carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.
Any impairment losses for write-downs of noncurrent assets held for sale are recognised in the
surplus or deficit. Any increases in fair value (less
costs to sell) are recognised up to the level of
any impairment losses that have been previously
recognised.
Non-current assets (including those that are
part of a disposal group) are not depreciated or
amortised while they are classified as held for sale.

Property, plant and
equipment
Property, plant and equipment consists of:
Operational assets – these include land,
buildings, motor vehicles, plant and equipment
and library books.
Restricted assets – these include artworks,
cultural assets and parks and reserves. These
assets provide a benefit or service to the
community and cannot be disposed of because
of legal or other restrictions.
Infrastructure assets – these include the fixed
utility systems comprising the roading, airport
runway, water reticulation and drainage systems,
and infrastructure land (including land under
roads). Each asset type includes all items that
are required for the network to function.

| 122 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Land (operational and restricted) is measured
at fair value, and buildings (operational and
restricted), and infrastructural assets are
measured at fair value less accumulated
depreciation. All other asset classes are
measured at cost less accumulated depreciation
and impairment losses.
Revaluation
Land, buildings (operational and restricted)
and infrastructural assets (except land under
roads) are revalued with sufficient regularity to
ensure that their carrying amount does not differ
materially from fair value and at least every
three years. All other asset classes are carried at
depreciated historical cost.
WDC assesses the carrying values of its revalued
assets annually to ensure that they do not differ
materially from the assets’ fair values. If there
is a material difference, then the off-cycle asset
classes are revalued.
WDC accounts for revaluations of property, plant
and equipment on a class of asset basis.
The net revaluation results are credited or
debited to other comprehensive income and
are accumulated to an asset revaluation reserve
in equity for that class of asset. Where this
results in a debit balance in the asset revaluation
reserve, this balance is expensed in the
surplus or deficit. Any subsequent increase on
revaluation that off-sets a previous decrease in
value recognised in the surplus or deficit will be
recognised first in the surplus or deficit up to the
amount previously expensed, and recognised in
other comprehensive income.
Additions
The cost of an item of property, plant and
equipment is recognised as an asset if, and only
if, it is probable that future economic benefits
or service potential associated with the item will
flow to WDC and the cost of the item can be
measured reliably.

Work in progress is recognised at cost less
impairment and is not depreciated.
In most instances, an item of property, plant
and equipment is recognised at its cost. Where
an asset is acquired at no cost, or for a nominal
cost, it is recognised at fair value as at the date
of acquisition.
Derecognition and Disposals
An asset is derecognised on disposal or when
no future economic benefits or service potential
is expected from its use or disposal. Gains and
losses on derecognition are determined by
comparing the proceeds, or future economic
benefits, with the carrying amount of the asset.
Gains and losses on disposals are reported
net in the surplus or deficit. The revaluation
surplus included in net assets/equity in respect
of property, plant and equipment will be
transferred directly to retained earnings when
the assets are derecognised.
Subsequent Costs
Costs incurred subsequent to initial acquisition
are capitalised only when it is probable that
future economic benefits or service potential
associated with the item will flow to the Council
and the cost of the item can be measured
reliably.

Statement of accounting policies

Depreciation
Depreciation is provided on a straight-line basis on all property, plant and equipment other than land
and art works, at rates that will write off the cost (or valuation) of the assets to their estimated residual
values over their useful lives. The useful lives and associated depreciation rates of major classes of
assets have been estimated as follows:
Useful life

Asset type
Land (including Restricted properties)

Depreciation rate
Not a depreciable item

Buildings and leasehold improvements
(including Restricted properties)

5 to 50 years

3.6%

Plant, vehicles and equipment

3 to 20 years

5-33%

Furniture & Fittings

5 to 10

10-20%

Library books

10 years

10%

Art Works

Not a Depreciable item

Infrastructural assets
Roading network:

Pavement

4-18 years

4.1%

Basecourse

4-18 years

Footpaths

4.1%

4.1%

Bridges & large culverts

100 years

4.1%

Kerb and channel

20-100 years

4.1%

Retaining Walls

50-100 years

4.1%

Street lighting

15-50 years

4.1%

Culverts

80 years

4.1%

Traffic signals and under road assets

5-50 years

4.1%

Wastewater system

20 to 120 years

1.9%

Stormwater system

20 to 120 years

1.4%

Water system

9 to 100 years

2.2%

Airport runway

10 years

10%

The residual value and useful life of an asset is reviewed, and adjusted if applicable,
at each financial year-end.
WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 123 |

Statement of accounting policies

Intangible assets
Goodwill

Software acquisition and development

Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of an
acquisition over the fair value of WDC’s share of
the identifiable assets, liabilities and contingent
liabilities of the acquired subsidiary/associate at
the date of acquisition. Goodwill on acquisition
of subsidiaries is included in “intangible assets”.
Goodwill on acquisition of associates is included
in “investments in associates” and is tested for
impairment as part of the overall balance.

Acquired computer software licenses are
capitalised on the basis of the costs incurred to
acquire and bring to use the specific software.

Separately recognised goodwill is tested
annually for impairment and carried at cost less
accumulated impairment losses. An impairment
loss recognised for goodwill is not reversed.
Goodwill is allocated to cash generating units
for the purposes of impairment testing. The
allocation is made to those cash generating
units or groups of cash generating units that
are expected to benefit from the business
combination, in which the goodwill arose.
Carbon credits
Carbon credits are initially recognised at cost.
After initial recognition they are not amortised
but all carbon credits are measured, annually, at
fair value.
The net revaluation result is credited or debited
to other comprehensive revenue and expense
and is accumulated to fair value through general
reserve. Where this results in a debit balance
in the reserve, this balance is not recognised
in other comprehensive revenue and expense
but is recognised in the surplus or deficit. Any
subsequent increase in revaluation that reverses
a previous decrease in value recognised in the
surplus or deficit will be recognised first in the
surplus or deficit up to the amount previously
expensed, and then recognised in other
comprehensive revenue and expense. They are
derecognised when they are used to satisfy
carbon emission obligations.
| 124 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Costs that are directly associated with the
development of software for internal use by
WDC, are recognised as an intangible asset.
Direct costs include the software development
employee costs and an appropriate portion of
relevant overheads.
Staff training costs are recognised as an expense
when incurred.
Costs associated with maintaining computer
software are recognised as an expense when
incurred.
Amortisation
The carrying value of an intangible asset with
a finite life is amortised on a straight-line basis
over its useful life. Amortisation begins when the
asset is available for use and ceases at the date
that the asset is derecognised. The amortisation
charge for each period is recognised in the
surplus or deficit.
The useful lives and associated amortisation
rates of major classes of intangible assets have
been estimated as follows:

Asset type

Useful life

Amortisation
rate

Computer
software

3 - 10 years

10% - 33%

Impairment of property,
plant and equipment and
intangible assets
Intangible assets that have an indefinite useful
life, or not yet available for use, are not subject
to amortisation and are tested annually for
impairment. Assets that have a finite useful life
are reviewed for indicators of impairment at
each balance date. When there is an indicator
of impairment the asset’s recoverable amount
is estimated. An impairment loss is recognised
for the amount by which the asset’s carrying
amount exceeds its recoverable amount. The
recoverable amount is the higher of an asset’s
fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
Value in use for non-cash generating assets
Non-cash generating assets are those assets
that are not held with the primary objective of
generating a commercial return.
Value in use is determined using an approach
based on either a depreciated replacement cost
approach, restoration cost approach, or a service
units approach. The most appropriate approach
depends on the nature of the impairment and
availability of information.
Value in use for cash-generating assets
Cash generating assets are those held for the
primary purpose of generating a commercial return.
The value in use for cash-generating assets and
cash-generating units is the present value of
expected future cash flows.
If an asset’s carrying amount exceeds its
recoverable amount, the asset is impaired and
the carrying amount is written down to the
recoverable amount. The total impairment loss
is recognised in the surplus or deficit. Where an
impairment loss is reversed this is recognised in
the surplus or deficit.

Statement of accounting policies

Investment property

Employee entitlements

Superannuation schemes

Properties leased to third parties under
operating leases are classified as investment
property unless the property is held to meet
service delivery objectives, rather than to earn
rentals or for capital appreciation.

Short-term employee entitlements

Defined contribution schemes

Employee benefits that WDC expects to be
settled within 12 months of balance date are
measured at nominal values based on accrued
entitlements at current rates of pay.
These include salaries and wages accrued up to
balance date, annual leave earned to, but not yet
taken at, balance date, retiring and long service
leave entitlements expected to be settled within
12 months, and sick leave.

Obligations for contributions to defined
contribution superannuation schemes are
recognised as an expense in the surplus or
deficit as incurred.

Investment property is measured initially at its
cost, including transaction costs.
After initial recognition, WDC measures all
investment property at fair value as determined
annually by an independent valuer.
Gains or losses arising from a change in the fair
value of investment property are recognised in
the surplus or deficit.

Creditors and other
payables
Creditors and other payables are recorded at
the amount payable.

Borrowings
Borrowings are initially recognised at their fair
value net of transaction costs incurred. After
initial recognition, all borrowings are measured
at amortised cost using the effective interest
method.
Borrowings are classified as current liabilities
unless WDC has an unconditional right to defer
settlement of the liability for at least 12 months
after the balance date.

WDC recognises a liability for sick leave to
the extent that absences in the coming year
are expected to be greater than the sick leave
entitlements earned in the coming year. The amount
is calculated based on the unused sick leave
entitlement that can be carried forward at balance
date, to the extent that WDC anticipates it will be
used by staff to cover those future absences.
WDC recognises a liability and an expense for
bonuses where contractually obliged or where
there is a past practice that has created a
constructive obligation.
Long-term employee entitlements
Entitlements that are due to be settled beyond 12
months after the end of the period in which the
employee renders service, such as long service
leave and retiring leave; have been calculated on an
actuarial basis. The calculations are based on likely
future entitlements accruing to staff, based on
years of service, years to entitlement, the likelihood
that staff will reach the point of entitlement and
contractual entitlements information; and the
present value of the estimated future cash flows.
Presentation of employee entitlements
Sick leave, annual leave, vested long service leave,
and non-vested long service leave and retirement
gratuities expected to be settled within 12 months
of balance date, are classified as a current liability.
All other employee entitlements are classified as a
non-current liability.

Equity
Equity is the community’s interest in WDC and is
measured as the difference between total assets
and total liabilities. Equity is disaggregated and
classified into a number of reserves.
The components of equity are:
•
•
•
•

retained earnings
restricted reserves
asset revaluation reserves
other reserves

Restricted reserves
Restricted reserves are a component of equity
generally representing a particular use to which
various parts of equity have been assigned.
Reserves may be legally restricted or created
by WDC.
Restricted reserves are those subject to specific
conditions accepted as binding by WDC and
which may not be revised by WDC without
reference to the Courts or a third party. Transfers
from these reserves may be made only for
certain specified purposes or when certain
specified conditions are met.
Also included in restricted reserves are reserves
restricted by Council decision. The Council
may alter them without references to any third
party or the Courts. Transfers to and from these
reserves are at the discretion of the Council.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 125 |

Statement of accounting policies

Revaluation Reserves
These relate to the revaluation of land, buildings
and infrastructural assets to fair value.
Other Reserves
These relate to the revaluation of financial
assets (shares and bonds) to fair value and the
revaluation of carbon credits to fair value.

Goods and Service Tax
(GST)
All items in the financial statements are stated
exclusive of GST, except for receivables and
payables, which are stated on a GST inclusive
basis. Where GST is not recoverable as input tax
then it is recognised as part of the related asset
or expense.
The net amount of GST recoverable from, or
payable to, the Inland Revenue Department
(IRD) is included as part of receivables or
payables in the statement of financial position.
The net GST paid to, or received from the IRD,
including the GST relating to investing and
financing activities, is classified as an operating
cash flow in the statement of cash flows.
Commitments and contingencies are disclosed
exclusive of GST.

Landfill post-closure costs
WDC, as past operator of the Balgownie landfill,
has a legal obligation under the resource
consent to provide on-going monitoring of the
landfill after its closure. Post-closure monitoring
costs are recognised as expenses when the
obligation for post-closure arises.

| 126 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Cost allocation
WDC has derived the cost of service for each
significant activity of WDC using the cost
allocation system outlined below.
Direct costs are those costs directly attributable
to a significant activity. Indirect costs are
those costs which cannot be identified in an
economically feasible manner with a specific
significant activity.
Direct costs are charged directly to significant
activities. Indirect costs are charged to
significant activities using appropriate cost
drivers such as operating expenditure net of
NZTA subsidies.

Critical accounting
estimates and assumptions
In preparing these financial statements WDC has
made estimates and assumptions concerning
the future. These estimates and assumptions
may differ from the subsequent actual results.
Estimates and assumptions are continually
evaluated and are based on historical experience
and other factors, including expectations or
future events that are believed to be reasonable
under the circumstances. The estimates and
assumptions that have a significant risk of
causing a material adjustment to the carrying
amounts of assets and liabilities within this Plan
are discussed below:
WDC infrastructural assets
There are a number of assumptions and
estimates used when performing DRC valuations
over infrastructural assets. These include:
• the physical deterioration and condition of
an asset, for example the Council could be
carrying an asset at an amount that does not
reflect its actual condition. This is particularly
so for those assets which are not visible,
for example stormwater, wastewater and

water supply pipes that are underground.
This risk is minimised by Council performing
a combination of physical inspections
and condition modelling assessments of
underground assets;
• estimating any obsolescence or surplus
capacity of an asset;
• estimates are made when determining the
remaining useful lives over which the asset
will be depreciated. These estimates can be
impacted by the local conditions, for example
weather patterns and traffic growth. If useful
lives do not reflect the actual consumption
of the benefits of the asset, then WDC could
be over or under estimating the annual
depreciation charge recognised as an expense
in the surplus or deficit. To minimise this
risk, WDC’s infrastructural asset useful lives
have been determined with reference to
the NZ Infrastructural Asset Valuation and
Depreciation Guidelines published by the
National Asset Management Steering Group,
and have been adjusted for local conditions
based on past experience. Asset inspections,
deterioration and condition modelling are also
carried out regularly as part of the WDC’s
asset management planning activities, which
gives WDC further assurance over its useful
life estimates.
Experienced independent valuers perform
or review the Council’s infrastructural asset
revaluations.

Statement of accounting policies

Critical judgements in
applying WDC’s
accounting policies
Management has exercised the following critical
judgements in applying the WDC’s accounting
policies:
Classification of property
WDC owns a number of properties, which are
maintained primarily to provide housing to
pensioners. The receipt of market-based rental
from these properties is incidental to holding
these properties. These properties are held
for service delivery objectives as part of the
Council’s social housing policy. These properties
are accounted for as property, plant and
equipment.
Impairment of shares in subsidiary
Management reviews its share investment in
its subsidiary and has made estimates and
assumptions concerning the future. These
estimates and assumptions include revenue
growth, future cash flows and future economic
and market conditions. These estimates
are based upon assumptions believed to be
reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain
and unpredictable. WDC minimises the risk of
this estimation uncertainty by annually reviewing
the value of its share investment.

Implementation of new and amended standards
PBE IPSAS 41 Financial Instruments is effective
from periods beginning on or after 1 January
2021. PBE IPSAS 41 includes three areas of
change:
• Classification and measurement of
financial instruments
• A single, forward looking, ‘expected credit
loss’ impairment model; and
• Substantially reformed approach to
hedge accounting
WDC has elected to early adopt all of the
requirements of PBE IFRS 9 and will early adopt
the requirements of PBE IPSAS 41.
We understand there is no substantive
differences between the core requirements of
PBE IFRS 9 and PBE IPSAS 41.
All other standards, interpretations and
amendments approved but not yet effective
in the current year are either not applicable to
WDC or are not expected to have a material
impact on the financial statements of the council
and, therefore, have not been disclosed.

Comparative Information
The Annual Plan 2020/2021 adopted by the
council on 23 June 2020 has been provided as a
comparator for these consolidated prospective
financial statements. The closing balance in this
comparative differs from the opening position
used to prepare these consolidated prospective
financial statements which is based on the most
up-to-date forecast information.

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 127 |

Contact us

Animal control...................................................................... (06) 349 0001

Contact us
Address
101 Guyton Street
Whanganui
Postal
PO Box 637
Whanganui 4500
Telephone (06) 349 0001
Email

yourcouncil@whanganui.govt.nz

Web

www.whanganui.govt.nz

Building and planning ...................................................... (06) 349 0001
Cemetery and crematorium ............................................ (06) 343 9412
Civil Defence ........................................................................ (06) 349 0001
Customer services .............................................................. (06) 349 0001
Health and liquor licensing ............................................ (06) 349 0001
i-Site information centre ................................................. (06) 349 3258
Library ..................................................................................... (06) 349 1000
War Memorial Hall – Conference and Convention Centre
– Whanganui Venues & Events
events@whanganui.govt.nz .............................................. (06) 3490513
Noise complaints ................................................................ (06) 349 0001
Parking .................................................................................... (06) 349 0001
Property .................................................................................. (06) 349 0001
Rates and debtor enquiries ........................................... (06) 349 0001
Royal Whanganui Opera House
Whanganui Venues & Events
events@whanganui.govt.nz .............................................. (06) 349 0511
Sarjeant Gallery
info@sarjeant.org.nz ......................................................... (06) 349 0506
Splash Centre ......................................................................... (06) 349 0113
Water and wastewater ..................................................... (06) 349 0001
Whanganui Regional Museum ......................................... (06) 349 1110

| 128 |

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

Glossary

Glossary
Annual Plan

The Annual Plan sets out what the Council intends to achieve over the next year, the budget for that specific year, how it
will measure its performance and who will pay. No Annual Plan is produced in a year when a Long-Term Plan is published.

Capital expenditure
(Capital acquisitions)

Funding necessary for new works that add to the Council’s existing assets.

Community outcomes /
Leading Edge Strategy

Our vision for the future of our community to be enacted through our Leading Edge Strategy.

Forecast

Prospective financial information prepared on the basis of assumptions as to future events that the Council reasonably
expects to occur.

Groups of activities

The Council’s activities are allocated to 11 groups – Water supply; Stormwater drainage; Sewerage and the treatment and
disposal of sewage; Provision of roads and footpaths; Parks and recreation; Community and cultural; Economic development;
Community facilities and services; Transportation; Investments; and Corporate – based on their relationship and the rationale
for providing them.

Infrastructure

Includes roads, water pipes, drainage pipes, footpaths, pump stations, bridges etc.

Long-Term Plan

A plan which outlines the Council’s programme for the next 10 years and how it will contribute to achieving the
Community Outcomes. Also includes a 30-year Infrastructure Strategy.

Operational expenditure

All funding for providing services on a day-to-day basis, excluding renewal and capital expenditure.

Performance measures

How the Council will assess progress toward achieving outcomes and service levels.

Projection

Prospective financial information prepared on the basis of one or more hypothetical but realistic assumptions that reflect
possible courses of action.

Renewal expenditure
(Capital replacements)

Funding for works that replace the existing assets over their projected lifetime.		

WHANGANUI DISTRICT COUNCIL - LONG-TERM PLAN 2021-2031
Volume 1

| 129 |

Ko ta maatau
mahere.
It’s our plan.

Whanganui
District Council
Long-Term Plan
2021-2031

